# COPYRIGHT

# 2024 International Energy Conservation Code®

# Commercial Provisions

Date of Public Comment Draft #1: September 6, 2022

# COPYRIGHT © 2022

by

# INTERNATIONAL CODE COUNCIL, INC.

ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. This Public Comment Draft #1 of the 2024 International Energy Conservation Code® Commercial Provisions is a copyrighted work owned by the International Code Council, Inc. (“ICC”). Without advance written permission from the ICC, no part of this book may be reproduced, distributed or transmitted in any form or by any means, including, without limitation, electronic, optical or mechanical means (by way of example, and not limitation, photocopying or recording by or in an information storage retrieval system). For information on use rights and permissions, please contact: ICC Publications, 4051 Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, IL 60478. Phone 1-888-ICC-SAFE (422-7233).

Trademarks: “International Code Council,” the “International Code Council” logo, “ICC,” the “ICC” logo, “International Energy Conservation Code,” “IECC” and other names and trademarks appearing in this book are registered trademarks of the International Code Council, Inc., and/or its licensors (as applicable), and may not be used without permission.

# PRINTED IN THE USA
# IECC—COMMERCIAL PROVISIONS
# CHAPTER C

# CODE

This code establishes the limits of applicability of the code and describes how the code is to be applied and enforced. Chapter C is in two parts: Part 1—Scope and Application and Part 2—Administration and Enforcement. Chapter C identifies that buildings, systems, and equipment all under its purview and references other I Codes as applicable. Standards and codes are shown to the extent referenced.

The code is intended to be adopted as a legally enforceable document and it cannot be effective without adequate provisions for its administration and enforcement. The provisions of Chapter C establish the authority and duties of the code official appointed by the authority having jurisdiction and also establish the rights and privileges of the design professional, contractor, and property owner.

# PART 1—SCOPE AND APPLICATION

# SECTION C101

This code shall be known as the Energy Conservation Code of Rhode Island, and shall be cited as such. It is referred to herein as “this code.”

This code applies to the design and construction of buildings not covered by the scope of the IECC Residential Provisions.

# SECTION C102

The International Energy Conservation Code - Commercial Provisions provide market-driven, enforceable requirements for the design and construction of commercial buildings, providing minimum efficiency requirements for buildings that result in the maximum level of energy efficiency that is safe, technologically feasible, and life cycle cost effective, considering economic feasibility, including potential costs and savings for consumers and building owners, and return on investment. Additionally, the code provides jurisdictions with supplemental requirements, including ASHRAE 90.1, and optional requirements that lead to achievement of zero energy buildings, presently, and through glidepaths that achieve zero energy buildings by 2030 and on additional timelines sought by governments, and achievement of additional policy goals as identified by the Energy and Carbon Advisory Council and approved by the Board of Directors. Requirements contained in the code will include, but not be limited to, prescriptive- and performance-based pathways. The code may include non-
Mandatory appendices incorporating additional energy efficiency and greenhouse gas reduction resources developed by the Code Council and others. The code will aim to simplify code requirements to facilitate the code's use and compliance rate. The code is updated on a three-year cycle with each subsequent edition providing increased energy savings over the prior edition. This code is intended to provide flexibility to permit the use of innovative approaches and techniques to achieve this intent. This code is not intended to abridge safety, health or environmental requirements contained in other applicable codes or ordinances.

Where, in any specific case, different sections of this code specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall govern.

Where a building includes both residential building and commercial building portions, each portion shall be separately considered and meet the applicable provisions of IECC Commercial Provisions or IECC Residential Provisions.

Residential buildings shall meet the provisions of IECC Residential Provisions. Commercial buildings shall meet the provisions of IECC Commercial Provisions.

The code official shall be permitted to approve specific computer software, worksheets, compliance manuals and other similar materials that meet the intent of this code.

The provisions of this code are not intended to prevent the installation of any material or to prohibit any design or method of construction not specifically prescribed by this code, provided that any such alternative has been approved. The code official shall have the authority to approve an alternative material, design or method of construction upon the written application of the owner or the owner's authorized agent. The code official shall first find that the
The proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions of this code, and that the material, method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, not less than the equivalent of that prescribed in this code in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability, energy conservation and safety. The code official shall respond to the applicant, in writing, stating the reasons why the alternative was approved or was not approved.

# C

The code official or other authority having jurisdiction shall be permitted to deem a national, state or local energy efficiency program as exceeding the energy efficiency required by this code. Buildings approved in writing by such an energy efficiency program shall be considered to be in compliance with this code. The requirements identified in T C shall be met.

# P RT I I TR TIO ORC T

# CTIO C CO TR CTIO OC T

# CTIO C CO TR CTIO OC T

# C G

Construction documents and other supporting data shall be submitted in one or more sets, or in a digital format where allowed by the building official, with each application for a permit. The construction documents shall be prepared by a registered design professional where required by the statutes of the jurisdiction in which the project is to be constructed. Where special conditions exist, the code official is authorized to require necessary construction documents to be prepared by a registered design professional.

The code official is authorized to waive the requirements for construction documents or other supporting data if the code official determines they are not necessary to confirm compliance with this code.

# C I

# C I

Construction documents shall be drawn to scale on suitable material. Electronic media documents are permitted to be submitted where approved by the code official. Construction documents shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature and extent of the work proposed, and show in sufficient detail pertinent data and features of the building, systems and equipment as herein governed. Details shall include, but are not limited to, the following as applicable:

1. Energy compliance path.
2. Insulation materials and their R-values.
3. Fenestration U-factors and solar heat gain coefficients (SHGCs).
4. Area-weighted U-factor and solar heat gain coefficient (SHGC) calculations.
5. Mechanical system design criteria.
# 6. Mechanical and service water-heating systems and equipment types, sizes and efficiencies.

# 7. Economizer description.

# 8. Equipment and system controls.

# 9. Fan motor horsepower (hp) and controls.

# 10. Duct sealing, duct and pipe insulation and location.

# 11. Lighting fixture schedule with wattage and control narrative.

# 12. Location of daylight zones on floor plans.

# 13. Air barrier and air sealing details, including the location of the air barrier.

# 14. Location of pathways for routing of raceways or cable from the on-site renewable energy system to the electrical distribution equipment.

# 15. Thermal bridges as identified in Section C402.6.

# 16. Location reserved for inverters, metering equipment, ESS, and a pathway reserved for routing of raceways or conduit from the renewable energy system to the point of interconnection with the electrical service and the ESS.

# 17. Location and layout of a designated area for ESS.

# 18. Rated energy capacity and rated power capacity of the installed or planned ESS.

The building thermal envelope shall be represented on the construction drawings.

The code official shall examine or cause to be examined the accompanying construction documents and shall ascertain whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of this code and other pertinent laws or ordinances. The code official is authorized to utilize a registered design professional, or other approved entity not affiliated with the building design or construction, in conducting the review of the plans and specifications for compliance with the code.

When the code official issues a permit where construction documents are required, the construction documents shall be endorsed in writing and stamped “Reviewed for Code Compliance.” Such approved construction documents shall not be changed, modified or altered without authorization from the code official. Work shall be done in accordance with the approved construction documents. One set of construction documents so reviewed shall be retained by the code official. The other set shall be returned to the applicant, kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the code official or a duly authorized representative.

This code shall not require changes in the construction documents, construction or designated occupancy of a structure for which a lawful permit has been heretofore issued or otherwise lawfully authorized, and the construction of which has been pursued in good faith within 180 days after the effective date of this code and has not been abandoned.
The code official shall have the authority to issue a permit for the construction of part of an energy conservation system before the construction documents for the entire system have been submitted or approved, provided that adequate information and detailed statements have been filed complying with all pertinent requirements of this code. The holders of such permit shall proceed at their own risk without assurance that the permit for the entire energy conservation system will be granted.

Changes made during construction that are not in compliance with the approved construction documents shall be resubmitted for approval as an amended set of construction documents.

One set of approved construction documents shall be retained by the code official for a period of not less than 180 days from date of completion of the permitted work, or as required by state or local laws.

The construction documents shall specify that the documents described in this section be provided to the building owner or owner's authorized agent within 90 days of the date of receipt of the certificate of occupancy.

Construction documents shall be updated to convey a record of the completed work. Such updates shall include mechanical, electrical and control drawings that indicate all changes to size, type and location of components, equipment and assemblies.

Energy code compliance documentation and supporting calculations shall be delivered in one document to the building owner as part of the project record documents or manuals, or as a standalone document. This document shall include the specific energy code edition utilized for compliance determination for each system, documentation demonstrating compliance with C for each fenestration product installed, and the interior lighting power compliance path, building area or space-by-space, used to calculate the lighting power allowance.

For projects complying with Item 2 of C, the documentation shall include:

1. The envelope insulation compliance path.
2. All compliance calculations including those required by C, C, C and C.
For projects complying with C, the documentation shall include that required by C and C.

Training shall be provided to those responsible for maintaining and operating equipment included in the manuals required by C.

The training shall include:

1. Review of manuals and permanent certificate.
2. Hands-on demonstration of all normal maintenance procedures, normal operating modes, and all emergency shutdown and startup procedures.
3. Training completion report.

A permit shall not be valid until the fees prescribed by law have been paid. Nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, has been paid.

A fee for each permit shall be paid as required, in accordance with the schedule as established by the applicable governing authority.

The applicant for a permit shall provide an estimated value of the work for which the permit is being issued at the time of application. Such estimated valuations shall include the total value of the work, including materials and labor. Where, in the opinion of the code official, the valuation is underestimated, the permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates acceptable to the code official. The final valuation shall be approved by the code official.

Any person who commences any work before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to a fee established by the code official that shall be in addition to the required permit fees.

The payment of the fee for the construction, alteration, removal or demolition of work done in connection to or concurrently with the work or activity authorized by a permit shall not
relieve the applicant or holder of the permit from the payment of other fees that are prescribed by law.

# C

The code official is authorized to establish a refund policy.

# CTIO C I P CTIO

# C G

Construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the code official, his or her designated agent or an approved agency, and such construction or work shall remain visible and able to be accessed for inspection purposes until approved. Approval as a result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an approval of a violation of the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction. Inspections presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid. It shall be the duty of the permit applicant to cause the work to remain visible and able to be accessed for inspection purposes. Neither the code official nor the jurisdiction shall be liable for expense entailed in the removal or replacement of any material, product, system or building component required to allow inspection to validate compliance with this code.

# C R

The code official, his or her designated agent or an approved agency, upon notification, shall make the inspections set forth in C through C.

# C

Inspections shall verify the footing and foundation insulation R-value, location, thickness, depth of burial and protection of insulation as required by the code, approved plans and specifications.

# C T

Inspections shall verify the correct type of insulation, R-values, location of insulation, fenestration, U-factor, SHGC and VT, and that air leakage controls are properly installed, as required by the code, approved plans and specifications.

# C P

Inspections shall verify the type of insulation, R-values, protection required, controls and heat traps as required by the code, approved plans and specifications.
# Specifications

Inspections shall verify the installed HVAC equipment for the correct type and size, controls, insulation, U-values, system and damper air leakage, minimum fan efficiency, energy recovery and economizer as required by the code, approved plans and specifications.

Inspections shall verify lighting system controls, components and meters as required by the code, approved plans and specifications. Where an electrical energy storage system area is required, inspections shall verify space availability and pathways to electrical service.

The final inspection shall include verification of the installation and proper operation of all required building controls, and documentation verifying activities associated with required building commissioning have been conducted in accordance with the code.

A building shall be reinspected where determined necessary by the code official.

The code official is authorized to accept reports of third-party inspection agencies not affiliated with the building design or construction, provided that such agencies are approved as to qualifications and reliability relevant to the building components and systems that they are inspecting.

It shall be the duty of the holder of the permit or their duly authorized agent to notify the code official when work is ready for inspection. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to provide access to and means for inspections of such work that are required by this code.

Where any work or installation does not pass an initial test or inspection, the necessary corrections shall be made to achieve compliance with this code. The work or installation shall then be resubmitted to the code official for inspection and testing.
# CTIO C OTIC O PPRO

After the prescribed tests and inspections indicate that the work complies in all respects with this code, a notice of approval shall be issued by the code official.

# CTIO C I ITY

The code official is authorized to suspend or revoke, in writing, a notice of approval issued under the provisions of this code wherever the certificate is issued in error, or on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or where it is determined that the building or structure, premise, or portion thereof is in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of this code.

# CTIO C R R C T R

If a portion of this code is held to be illegal or void, such a decision shall not affect the validity of the remainder of this code.

The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be those listed in C, and such codes and standards shall be considered as part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference and as further regulated in C and C.

Where conflicts occur between provisions of this code and referenced codes and standards, the provisions of this code shall apply.
Where the extent of the reference to a referenced code or standard includes subject matter that is within the scope of this code, the provisions of this code, as applicable, shall take precedence over the provisions in the referenced code or standard.

References to chapter or section numbers, or to provisions not specifically identified by number, shall be construed to refer to such chapter, section or provision of this code.

The provisions of this code shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions of local, state or federal law.

Where the code official finds any work regulated by this code being performed in a manner contrary to the provisions of this code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, the code official is authorized to issue a stop work order.

The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, the owner's authorized agent or the person performing the work. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited work shall immediately cease. The stop work order shall state the reason for the order and the conditions under which the cited work is authorized to resume.

Where an emergency exists, the code official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work.

Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to fines established by the authority having jurisdiction.
# CTIO C O R O PP

# CTIO C

In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the code official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a board of appeals. The code official shall be an ex officio member of said board but shall not have a vote on any matter before the board. The board of appeals shall be appointed by the governing body and shall hold office at its pleasure. The board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business, and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the code official.

An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply or an equally good or better form of construction is proposed. The board shall not have authority to waive requirements of this code.

The board of appeals shall consist of members who are qualified by experience and training and are not employees of the jurisdiction.
# CHAPTER C

# Codes and Their Very Nature

Codes are technical documents. Every word, term, and notation can add to or change the meaning of a technical requirement. It is necessary to maintain a consensus on the specific meaning of each term contained in the code. Careful attention is required in stating clearly what specific terms mean for the purposes of the code.

# SECTION C

# General

Unless stated otherwise, the following words and terms in this code shall have the meanings indicated in this chapter.

# Definitions

Words used in the present tense include the future; words in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter; the singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular.

# Terms Not Defined

Terms that are not defined in this code but are defined in the International Building Code, International Fire Code, International Mechanical Code, International Plumbing Code, or the International Residential Code shall have the meanings ascribed to them in those codes.

# Ordinarily Accepted Meanings

Terms not defined by this chapter shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies.

# SECTION C

# General

That which enables a device, appliance, or equipment to be reached by ready access or by a means that first requires the removal or movement of a panel or similar obstruction.

# Conditioned Space

An extension or increase in the conditioned space, floor area, number of stories, or height of a building or structure.
# Definitions

One or more materials joined together in a continuous manner to restrict or prevent the passage of air through the building thermal envelope and its assemblies.

# Air Curtain

A device, installed at the building entrance, that generates and discharges a laminar air stream intended to prevent the infiltration of external, unconditioned air into the conditioned spaces, or the loss of interior, conditioned air to the outside.

# Air Leakage

The uncontrolled air flow through the building thermal envelope caused by pressure differences across the building thermal envelope. Air leakage can be inward (infiltration) or outward (exfiltration) through the building thermal envelope.

# Alteration

Any construction, retrofit or renovation to an existing structure other than repair or addition. Also, a change in a building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system that involves an extension, addition or change to the arrangement, type or purpose of the original installation.

# Approved

Acceptable to the code official.

# Approved Agency

An established and recognized agency that is regularly engaged in conducting tests or furnishing inspection services, or furnishing product certification, where such agency has been approved by the code official.

# Approved Organization

An independent person, firm or corporation, approved by the building official, who is competent and experienced in the application of engineering principles to materials, methods or systems analyses.

# Automatic

Self-acting, operating by its own mechanism when actuated by some impersonal influence, as, for example, a change in current strength, pressure, temperature or mechanical configuration (see “Manual”).

# Automobile Parking Space

A space within a building or private or public parking lot, exclusive of driveways, ramps, columns, office and work areas, for the parking of an automobile.

# Biogas

A mixture of hydrocarbons that is a gas at 60°F (15.5°C) and 1 atmosphere of pressure that is produced through the anaerobic digestion of organic matter.

# Biomass

Organic non-fossil material of biological origin that is a byproduct or a discarded product. Biomass waste includes municipal solid waste from biogenic sources, landfill gas, sludge waste, agricultural crop byproducts, straw, and other biomass solids, liquids, and biogases but excludes wood and wood-derived fuels (including black liquor), biofuel feedstock, biodiesel, and fuel ethanol.

# Building Energy Model

A generic concept used in energy simulation. It can include one or more thermal zones. It represents a whole building or portion of a building with the same use type served by the same HVAC system type.

# Boiler

A boiler that is capable of more than a single firing rate in response to a varying temperature or heating load.

# Boiler System

One or more boilers, their piping and controls that work together to supply steam or hot water to heat output devices remote from the boiler.

# Condensing Point

The refrigerant liquid saturation temperature at a specified pressure.

# Building

Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy, including any mechanical systems, service water-heating systems and electric power and lighting.
# Building Systems and Definitions

Systems located on the building site and supporting the building.

# IIGCO

A process that verifies and documents that the selected building systems have been designed, installed and function according to the owner's project requirements and construction documents, and to minimum code requirements.

# IIGTRC

Any door, set of doors, doorway or other form of portal that is used to gain access to the building from the outside by the public.

# IIGIT

A contiguous area of land that is under the ownership or control of one entity.

# IIGTHR

The basement walls, exterior walls, floors, ceilings, roofs and any other building element assemblies that enclose conditioned space or provide a boundary between conditioned space and exempt or unconditioned space.

# CPTIYORRI

A lighting control that will not release the key that activates the override when the lighting is on.

# CITYIITIO

Insulating material located between framing members.

# CACTORTHRCOCTC

The coefficient of heat transmission (surface to surface) through a building component or assembly, equal to the time rate of heat flow per unit area and the unit temperature difference between the warm side and cold side surfaces (tu/h ft² F) W/(m²).

# CHGOC OCCPCY

A change in the use of a building or a portion of a building that results in any of the following:

1. A change of occupancy classification.
2. A change from one group to another group within an occupancy classification.
3. Any change in use within a group for which there is a change in the application of the requirements of this code.

# CHIACTORCTOR

The heat loss factor for a single thermal bridge characterized as a point element of a building thermal envelope (tu/h x F) W/.

# CIRC TIHG HOT T R Y T

A specifically designed water distribution system where one or more pumps are operated in the service hot water piping to circulate heated water from the water-heating equipment to the fixture supply and back to the water-heating equipment.

# C TR P P

A device that is designed for use in pumping water with a maximum nonabsorbent free solid content of 0.016 lb/ft (0.256 kg/m³) and with a maximum dissolved solid content of 3.1 lb/ft (4.66 kg/m³), provided that the total gas content of the water does not exceed the saturation volume, and disregarding any additives necessary to prevent the water from freezing at a minimum of 14°F (-10°C).

# CI T O

A geographical region based on climatic criteria as specified in this code.

# CO O ICI

The officer or other designated authority charged with the administration and enforcement of this code, or a duly authorized representative.

# CO ICI T O P R OR C COP COO I G

The ratio of the rate of heat removal to the rate of energy input, in consistent units, for a complete refrigerating system or some specific portion of that system under designated operating conditions.

# CO ICI T O P R OR C COP H TI G

The ratio of the rate of heat delivered to the rate of energy input, in consistent units, for a complete heat pump system, including the compressor and, if applicable, auxiliary heat, under designated operating conditions.
# CO RCI I I G

For this code, all buildings that are not included in the definition of “R .”

# CO O R

All portions of Group R occupancies that are not dwelling units or sleeping units.

# CO ITY R RGY CI ITY

A facility that produces energy harvested from renewable energy resources and is qualified as a community energy facility under applicable jurisdictional statutes and rules.

# CO P T R ROO

A room whose primary function is to house equipment for the processing and storage of electronic data which has a design total information technology equipment (ITE) equipment power density less than or equal to 20 watts per square foot (20 watts per 0.002 m²) of conditioned area or a design total ITE equipment load less than or equal to 10 kW.

# CO I G IT

A factory-made assembly of refrigeration components designed to compress and liquefy a specific refrigerant. The unit consists of one or more refrigerant compressors, refrigerant condensers (air-cooled, evaporatively cooled or water-cooled), condenser fans and motors (where used) and factory-supplied accessories.

# CO ITIO OOR R

The horizontal projection of the floors associated with the conditioned space.

# CO ITIO P C

An area, room or space that is enclosed within the building thermal envelope and is directly or indirectly heated or cooled. Spaces are indirectly heated or cooled where they communicate through openings with conditioned spaces, where they are separated from conditioned spaces by uninsulated walls, floors or ceilings, or where they contain uninsulated ducts, piping or other sources of heating or cooling.

# CO TR CTIO OC T

Written, graphic and pictorial documents prepared or assembled for describing the design, location, and physical characteristics of the elements of a project necessary for obtaining a building permit.

# CO TI O I TIO

Insulating material that is continuous across all structural members without thermal bridges other than fasteners and service openings. It is installed on the interior or exterior or is integral to any opaque surface of the building envelope.

# CR P C

The opaque portion of a wall that encloses a crawl space and is partially or totally below grade.

# C RT I

Fenestration products used to create an external nonload-bearing wall that is designed to separate the exterior and interior environments.

# T C T R

A room or series of rooms that share data center systems, whose primary function is to house equipment for the processing and storage of electronic data and that has a design total ITE equipment power density exceeding 20 watts per square foot (20 watts per 0.002 m²) of conditioned area and a total design ITE equipment load greater than 10 kW.

# T C T R Y T

HVAC systems and equipment, or portions thereof, used to provide cooling or ventilation in a data center.

# Y IGHT R PO I CO TRO

A device or system that provides automatic control of electric light levels based on the amount of daylight in a space.

# Y IGHT O

That portion of a building's interior floor area that is illuminated by natural light.

# IC T O T OOR IR Y T O

A ventilation system that supplies 100 percent outdoor air primarily for the purpose of ventilation, and that is a separate system from the one space-conditioning system.
# Definitions

A self-contained, electrically operated, and mechanically encased product with the sole purpose of dehumidifying the space consisting of:

1. A refrigerated surface (evaporator) that condenses moisture from the atmosphere,
2. A refrigerating system, including an electric motor,
3. An air-circulating fan, and
4. A means for collecting or disposing of the condensate.

A dehumidifier does not include a portable air conditioner, room air conditioner, or packaged terminal air conditioner.

# Control Systems

CO TRO ITCH TI TIO: A system that provides automatic, continuous control over exhaust hood and makeup air fan speed in response to temperature, optical, or infrared (IR) sensors that monitor cooking activity or through direct communication with cooking appliances.

CO TRO TI TIO C: A ventilation system capability that provides for the automatic reduction of outdoor air intake below design rates when the actual occupancy of spaces served by the system is less than design occupancy.

# Water Distribution

R CIRC TIO T R Y T: A water distribution system where one or more pumps prime the service hot water piping with heated water upon a demand for hot water.

# Demand Response

R  PO     IG: A signal that indicates a price or a request to modify electricity consumption for a limited time period.

R  PO  I   CO TRO: A control capable of receiving and automatically responding to a demand response signal.

# Mechanical Dehumidification

IC T   H  I I IC TIO Y T: A mechanical dehumidification technology that uses a solid or liquid material to remove moisture from the air.

# Digital Control

IR CT  IGIT   CO TRO C: A type of control where controlled and monitored analog or binary data, such as temperature and contact closures, are converted to digital format for manipulation and calculations by a digital computer or microprocessor, then converted back to analog or binary form to control physical devices.

# Air Conveyance

CT: A tube or conduit utilized for conveying air. The air passages of self-contained systems are not to be construed as air ducts.

CT Y T: A continuous passageway for the transmission of air that, in addition to ducts, includes duct fittings, dampers, plenums, fans and accessory air-handling equipment and appliances.

# Independent Living

I G   IT: A single unit providing complete independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.

# Dehumidification Systems

IC T   O T OOR  IR  Y T: A type of air-cooled, water-cooled or water source factory assembled product that dehumidifies 100 percent outdoor air to a low dew point and includes reheat that is capable of controlling the supply dry-bulb temperature of the dehumidified air to the designated supply air temperature. This conditioned outdoor air is then delivered directly or indirectly to the conditioned spaces. It may precondition outdoor air by containing an enthalpy wheel, sensible wheel, desiccant wheel, plate heat exchanger, heat pipes, or other heat or mass transfer apparatus with an energy recovery ventilation system.

# Fenestration Products

Y   IC G   I G: Any fenestration product that has the fully reversible ability to change its performance properties, including U-factor, solar heat gain coefficient (SHGC) or visible transmittance (VT).
# CO O I R

A duct and damper arrangement and automatic control system that allows a cooling system to supply outside air to reduce or eliminate the need for mechanical cooling during mild or cold weather.

# CO O I R T R

A system where the supply air of a cooling system is cooled indirectly with water that is itself cooled by heat or mass transfer to the environment without the use of mechanical cooling.

# CTRIC HIC

An automotive-type vehicle for on-road use, such as passenger automobiles, buses, trucks, vans, neighborhood electric vehicles, and electric motorcycles, primarily powered by an electric motor that draws current from a building electrical service, EVSE, a rechargeable storage battery, a fuel cell, a photovoltaic array, or another source of electric current. Plug-in hybrid electric vehicles are electric vehicles having a second source of motive power. Off-road, self-propelled electric mobile equipment, such as industrial trucks, hoists, lifts, transports, golf carts, airline ground support equipment, tractors, boats and the like, are not considered electric vehicles.

# CTRIC HIC C P P C

A designated automobile parking space that is provided with electrical infrastructure, such as, but not limited to, raceways, cables, electrical capacity, and panelboard or other electrical distribution equipment space, necessary for the future installation of an EVSE.

# CTRIC HIC R Y P C R Y P C

An automobile parking space that is provided with a branch circuit and either an outlet, junction box or receptacle, that will support an installed EVSE.

# CTRIC HIC PP Y IP T

Equipment for plug-in power transfer including the ungrounded, grounded and equipment grounding conductors, and the electric vehicle connectors, attachment plugs, personal protection system and all other fittings, devices, power outlets or apparatus installed specifically for the purpose of transferring energy between the premises wiring and the electric vehicle.

# CTRIC HIC PP Y IP T I T P C P C

An automobile parking space that is provided with a dedicated EVSE connection.

# ITT C

The ratio of the radiant heat flux emitted by a specimen to that emitted by a blackbody at the same temperature and under the same conditions.

# C O P C

A volume surrounded by solid surfaces such as walls, floors, roofs and openable devices, such as doors and operable windows.

# RGY Y I

A method for estimating the annual energy use of the proposed design and standard reference design based on estimates of energy use.

# RGY CO T

The total estimated annual cost for purchased energy for the building functions regulated by this code, including applicable demand charges.

# RGY R CO RY RI

A three-step process in which the first step is to remove energy from a single airstream without the use of mechanical cooling. In the second step, the air stream is mechanically cooled for the purpose of dehumidification. In the third step, the energy removed in step one is reintroduced to the air stream.

# RGY R CO RY R TIO RI RR

The difference between the dry bulb air temperatures leaving the series energy recovery unit and leaving the dehumidifying coil divided by the difference between 75 F (24 C) and the dry bulb temperature of the air leaving the dehumidifying cooling coil.

# RGY R CO RY TI TIO Y T

Systems that employ air-to-air heat exchangers.
# Energy Recovery

To recover energy from exhaust air for the purpose of preheating, precooling, humidifying or dehumidifying outdoor ventilation air prior to supplying the air to a space, either directly or as part of an HVAC system.

# Energy Use Calculation

An approved software program or calculation-based methodology that projects the annual energy use of a building.

# Energy Storage

One or more devices, assembled together, capable of storing energy in order to supply electrical energy at a future time.

# Energy Intensity

The metric indicating the total amount of energy consumed by a building in one year divided by the gross floor area of the building.

# Thermal Recovery Ratio

Change in the enthalpy of the outdoor air supply divided by the difference between the outdoor air and entering exhaust air enthalpy, expressed as a percentage.

# Traffic Door

A vertical fenestration product used for occupant ingress, egress and access in nonresidential buildings, including, but not limited to, exterior entrances utilizing latching hardware and automatic closers and containing over 50 percent glazing specifically designed to withstand heavy-duty usage.

# Equipment Room

A space that contains either electrical equipment, mechanical equipment, machinery, water pumps or hydraulic pumps that are a function of the building's services.

# Exterior Walls

Walls including both above-grade walls and basement walls.

# Exterior Wall Assembly

A system or assembly of exterior wall components, including exterior wall finish materials, that provides protection of the building structural members, including framing and sheathing materials, and conditioned interior space, from the detrimental effects of the exterior environment.

# Fan Assembly

A fan that is part of a manufactured assembly where the assembly includes functions other than air movement.

# Parallel Fans

Multiple fans in parallel between two plenum sections in an air distribution system.

# Horsepower

The horsepower delivered to the fan's shaft. Brake horsepower does not include the mechanical drive losses, such as that from belts and gears.

# Electrical Input Power

The electrical input power in kilowatts required to operate an individual fan or fan array at design conditions. It includes the power consumption of motor controllers, where present.

# Energy Input Ratio

The ratio of the electric input power of a reference fan to the electric input power of the actual fan as calculated in accordance with standards.

# Nominal Electrical Input Power

The nominal electrical input power rating stamped on a fan assembly nameplate.

# Combined Fan System

A fan system that combines a single-cabinet fan system with other supply fans, exhaust fans, or both.

# Exhaust Fan System

A fan system dedicated to the removal of air from interior spaces to the outdoors.

# Recirculating Fan System

A fan system dedicated to removing air from the interior where some or all the air is to be recirculated except during economizer operation.

# Integrated Fan System

A fan system where a single fan, single fan array, a single set of fans operating in parallel, or fans or fan arrays in series and embedded in the same cabinet that...
both supply air to a space and recirculate the air.

Y T TR R A fan system that exclusively moves air from one occupied space to another.

Y T IR O The sum of the airflow of all fans with fan electrical input power greater than 1 kW at fan system design conditions, excluding the airflow that passes through downstream fans with fan electrical input power less than 1 kW.

Y T HP The sum of the fan brake horsepower of all fans that are required to operate at fan system design conditions to supply air from the heating or cooling source to the conditioned spaces and return it to the source or exhaust it to the outdoors.

Y T IG CO ITIO Operating conditions that can be expected to occur during normal system operation that result in the highest supply fan airflow of by the system, other than during air economizer operation.

Y T CTRIC I P T PO R The sum of the fan electrical power of all fans that are required to operate at fan system design conditions to supply air from the heating or cooling source to the conditioned spaces and/or return it to the source or exhaust it to the outdoors.

Y T OTOR P T HP The sum of the motor nameplate horsepower of all fans that are required to operate at design conditions to supply air from the heating or cooling source to the conditioned spaces and return it to the source or exhaust it to the outdoors.

T T CTIO I G O TIC A software platform that utilizes building analytic algorithms to convert data provided by sensors and devices to automatically identify faults in building systems and provide a prioritized list of actionable resolutions to those faults based on cost or energy avoidance, comfort and maintenance impact.

TR TIO Products classified as either skylights or vertical fenestration.

Glass or other transparent or translucent glazing material installed at a slope of less than 60 degrees (1.05 rad) from horizontal, including unit skylights, tubular daylighting devices and glazing materials in solariums, sunrooms, roofs, greenhouses and sloped walls.

Windows that are fixed or operable, doors that are more than half glazed, glazed block and combination opaque and glazed doors composed of glass or other transparent or translucent glazing materials and installed at a slope of not less than 60 degrees (1.05 rad) from horizontal.

TR TIO PRO CT I RIC T A fenestration product whose frame is made at the construction site of standard dimensional lumber or other materials that were not previously cut or otherwise formed with the specific intention of being used to fabricate a fenestration product or exterior door. Field-fabricated does not include site-built fenestration.

TR TIO PRO CT IT I T A fenestration designed to be made up of field-glazed or field-assembled units using specific factory cut or otherwise factory-formed framing and glazing units. Examples of site-built fenestration include storefront systems, curtain walls and atrium roof systems.

CTOR The perimeter heat loss factor per unit perimeter length of slab-on-grade floors (tu/h ft F) W/(m ).

I CI R RGY PO R P RCH GR T A financial arrangement between a renewable electricity generator and a purchaser wherein the purchaser pays or guarantees a price to the generator for the project's renewable generation. Also known as a financial power purchase agreement and virtual power purchase agreement.
# Definitions

The actual occupied area not including unoccupied accessory areas such as corridors, stairways, toilet rooms, mechanical rooms and closets.

# Lighting

Interior lighting that provides a substantially uniform level of illumination throughout a space.

# Greenhouses

A structure or a thermally isolated area of a building that maintains a specialized sunlit environment with a skylight roof ratio of 50 percent or more above the growing area exclusively used for, and essential to, the cultivation, protection or maintenance of plants. Greenhouses are those that are erected for a period of 180 days or more.

# Group R

Buildings or portions of buildings that contain any of the following occupancies as established in the International Building Code:

1. R-1.
2. R-2 where located more than three stories in height above grade plane.
3. R-4 where located more than three stories in height above grade plane.

# Heat Trap

An arrangement of piping and fittings, such as elbows, or a commercially available heat trap that prevents thermosyphoning of hot water during standby periods.

# Heat Transfer

Slab-on-grade construction in which the heating elements, hydronic tubing or hot air distribution system is in contact with, or placed within or under, the slab.

# High-Speed Door

A nonswinging door used primarily to facilitate vehicular access or material transportation, with a minimum opening rate of 32 inches (813 mm) per second, a minimum closing rate of 24 inches (610 mm) per second and that includes an automatic-closing device.

# High Trim

A lighting control setting which limits the maximum power to individual luminaires or groups of luminaires in a space.

# Historic Building

Any building or structure that is one or more of the following:

1. Listed, or certified as eligible for listing, by the State Historic Preservation Officer or the Keeper of the National Register of Historic Places, in the National Register of Historic Places.
2. Designated as historic under an applicable state or local law.
3. Certified as a contributing resource within a National Register-listed, state-designated or locally designated historic district.

# Horticultural Lighting

Electric lighting used for horticultural production, cultivation or maintenance.

# Humidity Control

Automatic controls used to maintain humidity at a fixed or adjustable setpoint.

# Heating and Cooling Ratio

The ratio of the sum of a building's annual heating and cooling load in thousands of BTUs to the sum of annual site energy consumption of the building HVAC systems in BTUs.

# Induction Motor

An electric motor that meets all of the following:

1. It is an induction motor designed for use with three-phase power.
2. It contains a cage rotor.
3. It is capable of direct-on-line starting.
4. It has four, six or eight poles.
5. It is rated from 0.4 kW to 1600 kW at a frequency of 60 hertz.
# Induction Motor

1. It is an induction motor designed for use with three-phase power.
2. It contains a cage rotor.
3. It is capable of direct-on-line starting.
4. It has two, four, six or eight poles.
5. It is rated from 0.4 kW to 1600 kW at a frequency of 60 hertz.

# Definitions

# Greenhouse

A space, other than a greenhouse, used exclusively for, and essential to horticultural production, cultivation or maintenance.

# Infiltration

The uncontrolled inward air leakage into a building caused by the pressure effects of wind or the effect of differences in the indoor and outdoor air density or both.

# Information Technology Equipment

Items including computers, data storage devices, servers and network and communication equipment.

# Integrated HVAC System

An HVAC system designed to handle both sensible and latent heat removal. Integrated HVAC systems include, but are not limited to HVAC systems with a sensible heat ratio of 0.65 or less and the capability of providing cooling, dedicated outdoor air systems, single package air conditioners with at least one refrigerant circuit providing hot gas reheat, and dehumidifiers modified to allow external heat rejection.

# Integrated Part Load Value

A single-number figure of merit based on part-load EER, COP or kW/ton expressing part-load efficiency for air-conditioning and heat pump equipment on the basis of weighted operation at various load capacities for equipment.

# Interior Curtain System

A system consisting of movable panels of fabric or plastic film used to cover and uncover the space enclosed in a greenhouse on a daily basis.

# Isolation Control

Devices that isolate HVAC zones so that they can be operated independently of one another. Isolation devices include separate systems, isolation dampers and controls providing shutoff at terminal boxes.

# Listed Equipment

Equipment, materials or products to which have been affixed a label, seal, symbol or other identifying mark of a nationally recognized testing laboratory, approved agency or other organization concerned with product evaluation that maintains periodic inspection of the production of the labeled items and whose labeling indicates either that the equipment, material or product meets identified standards or has been tested and found suitable for a specified purpose.

# Large Ceiling Fan

A ceiling fan that is greater than or equal to 84.5 inches (2146 mm) in diameter. These fans are sometimes referred to as High-Volume, Low-Speed (HVLS) fans.

# Roof Assembly

A system that includes the following:

1. A continuous vapor barrier liner membrane that is installed below the purlins and that is uninterrupted by framing members.
2. An uncompressed, unfaced insulation resting on top of the liner membrane and located between the purlins.

For multilayer installations, the last rated R-value of insulation is for unfaced insulation draped over purlins and then compressed when the metal roof panels are attached.

# Listed Products

Equipment, materials, products or services included in a list published by an organization acceptable to the code official and concerned with evaluation of products or services that maintains periodic inspection of production of listed equipment or materials or periodic evaluation of services and whose listing states either that the equipment, material, product or service meets identified standards or has been tested and found suitable for a specified purpose.
# Definitions

# Roof

A roof having a slope less than 2 units vertical in 12 units horizontal.

# Transformer

A transformer that is air-cooled, does not use oil as a coolant, has an input voltage less than or equal to 600 volts and is rated for operation at a frequency of 60 hertz.

# Lighting Control

A lighting system consisting of one or more luminaires with embedded lighting control logic, occupancy and ambient light sensors, wireless networking capabilities and local override switching capability, where required. Capable of being operated by personal intervention (see “A”).

# Motor Ratings

# Nominal Motor Output Power Rating

The nominal motor output power rating stamped on the motor nameplate.

# Squirrel-Cage Motor

A squirrel-cage motor that meets all of the following:

1. It is designed to withstand full-voltage starting and develop locked-rotor torque as shown in paragraph 12.38.1 of G.
2. It has pull-up torque not less than the values shown in paragraph 12.40.1 of G.
3. It has breakdown torque not less than the values shown in paragraph 12.3.1 of G.
4. It has a locked-rotor current higher than the values shown in paragraph 12.35.1 of G for 60 hertz and paragraph 12.35.2 of G for 50 hertz.
5. It has a slip at rated load of less than 5 percent for motors with fewer than 10 poles.

# Squirrel-Cage Motor (General Application)

A squirrel-cage motor that meets all of the following:

1. It is designed to withstand full-voltage starting.
2. It develops locked-rotor, breakdown and pull-up torques adequate for general application as specified in Sections 12.38, 12.3 and 12.40 of G.
3. It draws locked-rotor current not to exceed the values shown in Section 12.35.1 for 60 hertz and Section 12.35.2 for 50 hertz of G.
4. It has a slip at rated load of less than 5 percent for motors with fewer than 10 poles.

# Squirrel-Cage Motor (High Torque Applications)

A squirrel-cage motor that meets all of the following:

1. Designed to withstand full-voltage starting and develop locked-rotor torque for high-torque applications up to the values shown in paragraph 12.38.2 of G (incorporated by reference, see A 431.15).
2. It has pull-up torque not less than the values shown in paragraph 12.40.2 of G.
3. It has breakdown torque not less than the values shown in paragraph 12.3.2 of G.
4. It has a locked-rotor current not to exceed the values shown in paragraph 12.35.1 of G for 60 hertz and paragraph 12.35.2 for 50 hertz.
5. It has a slip at rated load of less than 5 percent.

# Control System

A control system, with access from the front desk or other central location associated with a group-1 building, that is capable of identifying the rented and unrented status of each guestroom according to a timed schedule, and is capable of controlling HVAC in each hotel and motel guestroom separately.

# Part-Load Efficiency

A single-number part-load efficiency figure of merit calculated and referenced to conditions other than IPLV conditions, for units that are not designed to operate at AHRI standard rating conditions.

# Occupancy Control

An automatic control device or system that detects the presence or absence of people within an area and causes lighting, equipment or appliances to be...
# Definitions

regulated accordingly.

# OCCUPANCY

A code of operation when an HVAC system is scheduled to be occupied and an occupant sensor indicates no occupants are within the space.

# ENERGY

Energy from renewable energy resources harvested at the building project site.

# OPENING

A door that is not less than 50-percent opaque in surface area.

# OWNER

Any person, agent, operator, entity, firm or corporation having any legal or equitable interest in the property or recorded in the official records of the state, county or municipality as holding an interest or title to the property or otherwise having possession or control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court.

# PARKING GARAGE

A part of a parking garage that is separated from all other parts of the garage by full-height solid walls or operable openings that are intended to remain closed during normal operation and where vehicles cannot pass to other parts of the garage. It may include multiple floors if there are ramps to allow vehicles to pass between the floors.

# PHOTOSYNTHETIC PHOTON FLUX

Photosynthetic photon flux emitted by a light source divided by its electrical input power in units of micromoles per second per watt, or micromoles per joule (μmol/J) between 400-700nm as defined by ANSI/ASA E 640.

# POWER PURCHASE AGREEMENT

A contract for the purchase of renewable electricity from a specific renewable electricity generator to a purchaser of renewable electricity.

# POWER ROOF EXHAUST FAN

A fan consisting of a centrifugal or axial impeller with an integral driver in a weather-resistant housing and with a base designed to fit, usually by means of a curb, over a wall or roof opening.

# PROCESS APPLICATION

A manufacturing, industrial, or commercial procedure or activity where the primary purpose is other than conditioning spaces and maintaining comfort and amenities for the occupants of a building.

# PROPOSED BUILDING

A description of the proposed building used to estimate annual energy use for determining compliance based on simulated building performance and HVAC total system performance ratio.

# PUMP ENERGY INDEX

The ratio of a pump's energy rating divided by the energy rating of a minimally compliant pump. For pumps with the constant load operating mode, the relevant PEI is PEICL. For pumps with the variable load operating mode, the relevant PEI is PEIVL.

# RADIANT HEATING SYSTEM

A heating system that transfers heat to objects and surfaces within a conditioned space, primarily by infrared radiation.

# READILY ACCESSIBLE

That which enables a device, appliance or equipment to be directly reached without requiring the removal or movement of any panel or similar obstruction.

# REFRIGERANT TEMPERATURE POINT

The refrigerant vapor saturation temperature at a specified pressure.

# REFRIGERATED STORAGE ROOM

An enclosed storage space capable of being refrigerated to temperatures above 32°F (0°C) that can be walked into and has a total chilled storage area of not less than 3,000 square feet (27 m²).

# REFRIGERATED STORAGE ROOM (COLD ROOM)

An enclosed storage space capable of being refrigerated to temperatures at or below 32°F (0°C) that can be walked into and has a total chilled storage area of not less than 3,000 square feet (27 m²).
storage area of not less than 3,000 square feet (27 m²).

# R RIG R TIO Y T O T P R T R

Systems for maintaining food product in a frozen state in refrigeration applications.

# R RIG R TIO Y T I T P R T R

Systems for maintaining food product above freezing in refrigeration applications.

# R GI T R IG PRO IO

An individual who is registered or licensed to practice their respective design profession as defined by the statutory requirements of the professional registration laws of the state or jurisdiction in which the project is to be constructed.

# R RGY C RTI IC T R C

A market-based instrument that represents and conveys the environmental, social, and other non-power attributes of one megawatt hour of renewable electricity generation and could be sold separately from the underlying physical electricity associated with renewable energy resources, also known as energy attribute and energy attribute certificate (EAC).

# R RGY R O RC

Energy derived from solar radiation, wind, waves, tides, biomass waste or extracted from hot fluid or steam heated within the earth.

# R P IR

The reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing building for the purpose of its maintenance or to correct damage.

# R ROO I G

The process of recovering or replacing an existing roof covering. See “R” and “R”.

# R I TI I I G

For this code, includes detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) and R-2, R-3 and R-4 buildings three stories or less in height above grade plane.

# ROO Y

A system designed to provide weather protection and resistance to design loads. The system consists of a roof covering and roof deck or a single component serving as both the roof covering and the roof deck. A roof assembly includes the roof covering, underlayment, roof deck, insulation, vapor retarder and interior finish.

# ROO R CO R

The process of installing an additional roof covering over an existing roof covering without removing the existing roof covering.

# ROO R P IR

Reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing roof for the purpose of its maintenance.

# ROO R P C T

An alteration that includes the removal of all existing layers of roof assembly materials down to the roof deck and installing replacement materials above the existing roof deck.

# ROO TOP O ITOR

A raised section of a roof containing vertical fenestration along one or more sides.

# R TH R R I T C

The inverse of the time rate of heat flow through a body from one of its bounding surfaces to the other surface for a unit temperature difference between the two surfaces, under steady state conditions, per unit area (h ft² F/tu) (m²)/W.

# T R T CO I G T P R T R

The saturation temperature corresponding to the measured refrigerant pressure at the condenser inlet for single component and azeotropic refrigerants, and the arithmetic average of the dew point and bubble point temperatures corresponding to the refrigerant pressure at the condenser entrance for zeotropic refrigerants.

# I RGY R CO RY R TIO

Change in the dry-bulb temperature of the outdoor
# Definitions

Air supply divided by the difference between the outdoor air and entering exhaust air dry-bulb temperatures, expressed as a percentage.

# R IC TRH TI G

Supply of hot water for purposes other than comfort heating.

# I T I I G P R OR C

A process in which the proposed building design is compared to a standard reference design for the purposes of estimating relative energy use against a baseline to determine code compliance.

# PI G IT

A room or space in which people sleep that can include permanent provisions for living, eating, and either sanitation or kitchen facilities but not both. Such rooms and spaces that are part of a dwelling unit are not sleeping units.

# CTRIC OTOR

A general purpose alternating-current single-speed induction motor.

# O R H T G I CO ICI T HGC

The ratio of the solar heat gain entering the space through the fenestration assembly to the incident solar radiation. Solar heat gain includes directly transmitted solar heat and absorbed solar radiation that is then reradiated, conducted or convected into the space.

# T R R R C IG

A version of the proposed design that meets the minimum requirements of this code and is used to determine the maximum annual energy use requirement for compliance based on simulated building performance and HVAC total system performance ratio.

# TOR RO T

A system of doors and windows mulled as a composite fenestration structure that has been designed to resist heavy use. Storefront systems include, but are not limited to, exterior fenestration systems that span from the floor level or above to the ceiling of the same story on commercial buildings, with or without mulled windows and doors.

# T TI G IT C O R R

The area sum of all the boundary surfaces that define the dwelling unit, sleeping unit or conditioned enclosed space including top/ceiling, bottom/floor and all side walls. This does not include interior partition walls within the dwelling unit, sleeping unit, or conditioned enclosed space. Wall height shall be measured from the finished floor of the conditioned space to the finished floor or roof/ceiling air barrier above.

# TH R RI G

An element or interface of elements that has a higher thermal conductivity than the surrounding building thermal envelope, which creates a path of least resistance for heat transfer.

# TH R I TRI TIO ICI CY T

The resistance to changes in air heat as air is conveyed through a distance of air duct. TDE is a heat loss calculation evaluating the difference in the heat of the air between the air duct inlet and outlet caused by differences in temperatures between the air in the duct and the duct material. TDE is expressed as a percent difference between the inlet and outlet heat in the duct.

# TH R O T T

An automatic control device used to maintain temperature at a fixed or adjustable setpoint.

# TI ITCH CO TRO

An automatic control device or system that controls lighting or other loads, including switching off, based on time schedules.

# TOT I T I I G P R OR C

The process in which the total simulated performance of a proposed design is compared to that of a standard reference design for the purposes of estimating relative energy use in order to determine code compliance.

# CTOR TH R TR ITT C

The coefficient of heat transmission (air to air).
# Definitions

through a building component or assembly, equal to the time rate of heat flow per unit area and unit temperature difference between the warm side and cold side air films (tu/h ft² °F) W/(m² °C).

# Variable Refrigerant Flow (VRF)

An engineered direct-expansion (D) refrigerant system that incorporates a common condensing unit, at least one variable-capacity compressor, a distributed refrigerant piping network to multiple indoor fan heating and cooling units each capable of individual temperature control, through integral temperature control devices and a common communications network. Variable refrigerant flow utilizes three or more steps of control on common interconnecting piping.

# Green Roof

An assembly of interacting components designed to waterproof a building's top surface that includes, by design, vegetation and related landscape elements.

# Air Supply

The natural or mechanical process of supplying conditioned or unconditioned air to, or removing such air from, any space.

# Outdoor Air

That portion of supply air that comes from outside (outdoors) plus any recirculated air that has been treated to maintain the desired quality of air within a designated space.

# Visible Transmittance (VT)

The ratio of visible light entering the space through the fenestration product assembly to the incident visible light. Visible transmittance includes the effects of glazing material and frame and is expressed as a number between 0 and 1.

# Annual Visible Transmittance

The ratio of visible light entering the space through the fenestration product assembly to the incident visible light during the course of a year, which includes the effects of glazing material, frame, and light well or tubular conduit, and is expressed as a number between 0 and 1.

# Voltage Drop

A decrease in voltage caused by losses in the wiring systems that connect the power source to the load.

# Walk-in Cooler

An enclosed storage space capable of being refrigerated to temperatures above 32°F (0°C) and less than 55°F (12.8°C) that can be walked into, has a ceiling height of not less than 7 feet (2134 mm) and has a total chilled storage area of less than 3,000 square feet (27 m²).

# Walk-in Freezer

An enclosed storage space capable of being refrigerated to temperatures at or below 32°F (0°C) that can be walked into, has a ceiling height of not less than 7 feet (2134 mm) and has a total chilled storage area of less than 3,000 square feet (27 m²).

# Above Grade Wall

A wall associated with the building thermal envelope that is more than 15 percent above grade and is on the exterior of the building or any wall that is associated with the building thermal envelope that is not on the exterior of the building. This includes, but is not limited to, between-floor spandrels, peripheral edges of floors, roof knee walls, dormer walls, gable end walls, walls enclosing a mansard roof and skylight shafts.

# Below Grade Wall

A wall associated with the basement or first story of the building that is part of the building thermal envelope, is not less than 85 percent below grade and is on the exterior of the building.

# Water Heater

Any heating appliance or equipment that heats potable water and supplies such water to the potable hot water distribution system.

# Work Area

That portion or portions of a building consisting of all reconfigured spaces as indicated on the construction documents. Work area excludes other portions of the building where incidental work entailed by the intended work must be performed and portions of the building where work not initially intended by the owner is specifically required by this code.
A space or group of spaces within a building with heating or cooling requirements that are sufficiently similar so that desired conditions can be maintained throughout using a single controlling device.

# PICTOR

CTOR The heat loss factor per unit length of a thermal bridge characterized as a linear element of a building thermal envelope (tu/h ft F) W/(m).
# CH PT R

# C G R R IR T

A addresses broadly a li a le re irements that could not be at one in other a ters having more s e i i coverage o s e t atter is a ter established li ate one y o nties and territories and includes methodology for determining li ate ones elsewhere. It also contains product rating ar ing and installation re irements for materials such as insulation, windows, doors and siding.

# CTIO C C I T O

# CTIO C

# C G

C G Cli ate ones from C or T C shall be used for determining the applicable re uirements from C. Locations not indicated in T C shall be assigned a li ate one in accordance with C.
IG R C

C I T O
# Current Page

# TC

# C I T O OI T R R GI R H I IG TIO Y T T

# CO TY T RRITORY

| 3A | Autauga   |
| -- | --------- |
| 2A | Baldwin   |
| 3A | Barbour   |
| 3A | Bibb      |
| 3A | Blount    |
| 3A | Bullock   |
| 3A | Butler    |
| 3A | Calhoun   |
| 3A | Chambers  |
| 3A | Cherokee  |
| 3A | Chilton   |
| 3A | Choctaw   |
| 3A | Clarke    |
| 3A | Clay      |
| 3A | Cleburne  |
| 2A | Coffee    |
| 3A | Colbert   |
| 3A | Conecuh   |
| 3A | Coosa     |
| 2A | Covington |
| 3A | Crenshaw  |
| 3A | Cullman   |
| 2A | Dale      |
| 3A | Dallas    |
| 3A | DeKalb    |
| 3A | Elmore    |
| 2A | Escambia  |
| 3A | Etowah    |
| 3A | Fayette   |
| 3A | Franklin  |

# 2A

- Geneva
- Greene
- Hale
- Henry
- Houston
- # 3A

- Jackson
- Jefferson
- Lamar
- Lauderdale
- Lawrence
- Lee
- Limestone
- Lowndes
- Macone
- Madison
- Marengo
- Marion
- Marshall
- Mobile
- Monroe
- Montgomery
- Morgan
- Perry
- Pickens
- Pike
- Randolph
- Russell
- Shelby
- St. Clair
- Sumter
- Talladega
- Tallapoosa
- Tuscaloosa
- Walker
- Washington
# 3A

Wilcox

# 3A

Winston

# 7

Aleutians East

# 7

Aleutians West

# 7

Anchorage

# 7

ethel

# 7

ristol ay

# 8

Denali

# 7

Dillingham

# 8

Fairbanks North Star

# 6A

Haines

# 6A

uneau

# 7

enai Peninsula

# 5C

etchikan Gateway

# 6A

Kodiak Island

# 7

Lake and Peninsula

# 7

Matanuska-Susitna

# 8

Nome

# 8

North Slope

# 8

Northwest Arctic

# 5C

Prince of Wales Outer etchikan

# 5C

Sitka

# 6A

Skagway-Hoonah-Angoon

# 8

Southeast Fairbanks

# 7

Valde -Cordova

# 8

Wade Hampton

# 6A

Wrangell-Petersburg

# 7

Yakutat

# 8

Yukon- oyukuk

# RI O

# 5

Apache

# 3

Cochise

# 5

Coconino

# 4

Gila
# 3 Graham

# 3 Greenlee

# 2 La Pa

# 2 aricopa

# 3 ohave

# 5 Nava o

# 2 Pima

# 2 Pinal

# 3 Santa Cru

# 4 Yavapai

# 2 Yuma

# R

# 3A Arkansas

# 3A Ashley

# 4A axter

# 4A enton

# 4A oone

# 3A radley

# 3A Calhoun

# 4A Carroll

# 3A Chicot

# 3A Clark

# 3A Clay

# 3A Cleburne

# 3A Cleveland

# 3A Columbia

# 3A Conway

# 3A Craighead

# 3A Crawford

# 3A Crittenden

# 3A Cross

# 3A Dallas

# 3A Desha

# 3A Drew

# 3A Faulkner
# 3A

- Franklin
- Fulton
- Garland
- Grant
- Greene
- Hempstead
- Hot Spring
- Howard
- Independence
- I ard
- Jackson
- Jefferson
- Johnson
- Lafayette
- Lawrence
- Lee
- Lincoln
- Little River
- Logan
- Lonoke

# 4A

- Madison
- Marion

# 3A

- Miller
- Mississippi
- Monroe
- Montgomery
- Nevada
- Ouachita
- Perry
- Phillips
- Pike
- Poinsett
- Polk
- Pope
# 3A

- Prairie
- Pulaski
- Randolph
- Saline
- Scott
- Sebastian
- Sevier
- Sharp
- St. Francis
- Union
- Van Buren
- White
- Woodruff
- Yell

# 4A

- Searcy
- Stone
- Washington

# 3C

- Alameda

# 6

- Alpine

# 4

- Amador
- Calaveras
- El Dorado
- Humboldt
- Inyo

# 3

- Butte
- Colusa
- Contra Costa
- Fresno
- Glenn
- Imperial
- Lake
# 5 Lassen

# 3 Los Angeles

# 3 adera

# 3C arin

# 4 ariposa

# 3C endocino

# 3 erced

# 5 odoc

# 6 ono

# 3C onterey

# 3C Napa

# 5 Nevada

# 3 Orange

# 3 Placer

# 5 Plumas

# 3 Riverside

# 3 Sacramento

# 3C San enito

# 3 San ernardino

# 3 San Diego

# 3C San Francisco

# 3 San oa uin

# 3C San Luis Obispo

# 3C San ateo

# 3C Santa arbara

# 3C Santa Clara

# 3C Santa Cru

# 3 Shasta

# 5 Sierra

# 5 Siskiyou

# 3 Solano

# 3C Sonoma

# 3 Stanislaus

# 3 Sutter

# 3 Tehama
# 4  Trinity

# 3  Tulare

# 4  Tuolumne

# 3C Ventura

# 3  Yolo

# 3  Yuba

# CO OR  O

# 5  Adams

# 6  Alamosa

# 5  Arapahoe

# 6  Archuleta

# 4   aca

# 4   ent

# 5   oulder

# 5   roomfield

# 6  Chaffee

# 5  Cheyenne

# 7 Clear Creek

# 6  Cone os

# 6  Costilla

# 5  Crowley

# 5  Custer

# 5  Delta

# 5  Denver

# 6  Dolores

# 5  Douglas

# 6  Eagle

# 5  Elbert

# 5  El Paso

# 5  Fremont

# 5  Garfield

# 5  Gilpin

# 7 Grand

# 7 Gunnison

# 7 Hinsdale
# Counties

| Huerfano   | Jackson     | Jefferson  | Iowa     | It Carson  | Lake       |
| ---------- | ----------- | ---------- | -------- | ---------- | ---------- |
| La Plata   | Larimer     | Las Animas | Lincoln  | Logan      | Mesa       |
| Moffat     | Monte Vista | Montrose   | Organ    | Otero      | Ouray      |
| Park       | Phillips    | Pitkin     | Prowers  | Pueblo     | Rio Blanco |
| Rio Grande | Routt       | Saguache   | San Juan | San Miguel | Sedgwick   |
| Summit     | Teller      | Washington | Weld     |            |            |

# 5 Yuma

# CO CTIC T

# 5A (all)

# R

# 4A (all)

# I TRICT O CO I

# 4A (all)

# ORI

# 2A Alachua

# 2A Baker

# 2A Bay

# 2A Bradford

# 2A Brevard

# 1A Broward

# 2A Calhoun

# 2A Charlotte

# 2A Citrus

# 2A Clay

# 2A Collier

# 2A Columbia

# 2A DeSoto

# 2A Dixie

# 2A Duval

# 2A Escambia

# 2A Flagler

# 2A Franklin

# 2A Gadsden

# 2A Gilchrist

# 2A Glades

# 2A Gulf

# 2A Hamilton

# 2A Hardee

# 2A Hendry

# 2A Hernando

# 2A Highlands
# 2A

- Hillsborough
- Holmes
- Indian River
- Jackson
- Jefferson
- Lafayette
- Lake
- Lee
- Leon
- Levy
- Liberty
- Madison
- Manatee
- Marion
- Martin
- 1A Miami-Dade
- Monroe
- Nassau
- Okaloosa
- Okeechobee
- Orange
- Osceola
- 1A Palm Beach
- Pasco
- Pinellas
- Polk
- Putnam
- Santa Rosa
- Sarasota
- Seminole
- St. Johns
- St. Lucie
- Sumter
- Suwannee
- Taylor
# 2A

- Union
- Volusia
- Wakulla
- Walton
- Washington
- Appling
- Atkinson
- Bacon
- Baker
- Calhoun
- Camden
- Charlton
- Chatham

# 3A

- Baldwin
- Banks
- Barrow
- Bartow
- Ben Hill
- Burien
- Gibb
- Bleckley
- Brantley
- Brooks
- Bryan
- Candler
- Carroll
- Catoosa
- Chattahoochee
- Chattooga
- Cherokee
- Clarke
# 3A Clay

# 3A Clayton

# 2A Clinch

# 3A Cobb

# 2A Coffee

# 2A Colquitt

# 3A Columbia

# 2A Cook

# 3A Coweta

# 3A Crawford

# 3A Crisp

# 3A Dade

# 3A Dawson

# 2A Decatur

# 3A DeKalb

# 3A Dodge

# 3A Dooly

# 2A Dougherty

# 3A Douglas

# 2A Early

# 2A Echols

# 2A Effingham

# 3A Elbert

# 3A Emanuel

# 2A Evans

# 3A Fannin

# 3A Fayette

# 3A Floyd

# 3A Forsyth

# 3A Franklin

# 3A Fulton

# 3A Gilmer

# 3A Glascock

# 2A Glynn

# 3A Gordon
# 2A

- Grady
- Greene
- Gwinnett
- Habersham
- Hall
- Hancock
- Haralson
- Harris
- Hart
- Heard
- Henry
- Houston
- Irwin
- Jackson
- Jasper

# 2A

- Jeff Davis
- Jefferson
- Jenkins
- Johnson
- Jones
- Lamar

# 2A

- Lanier
- Laurens
- Lee

# 2A

- Liberty
- Lincoln

# 2A

- Long
- Lowndes

# 3A

- Lumpkin
- Bacon
- Madison
- Marion
- McDuffie

# 2A

- McIntosh
- Periwether
# 2A

- iller
- itchell

# 3A

- onroe
- ontgomery
- organ
- urray
- uscogee
- Newton
- Oconee
- Oglethorpe
- Paulding
- Peach
- Pickens
- Pierce
- Pike
- Polk
- Pulaski
- Putnam
- uitman
- Rabun
- Randolph
- Richmond
- Rockdale
- Schley
- Screven
- Seminole
- Spalding
- Stephens
- Stewart
- Sumter
- Talbot
- Taliaferro

# 2A

- Tattnall

# 3A

- Taylor
- Telfair
# 3A

- Terrell
- Thomas
- Tift
- Toombs
- Towns
- Treutlen
- Troup
- Turner
- Twiggs
- Union
- Upson
- Walker
- Walton
- Ware
- Warren
- Washington
- Wayne
- Webster
- Wheeler
- White
- Whitfield
- Wilcox
- Wilkes
- Wilkinson
- Worth

# H II

# 1A (all)

# I HO

- Ada
- Adams
- annock
- ear Lake
- enewah
- ingham
- laine
# Counties of Idaho

| 6 | o          | ise     |
| - | ---------- | ------- |
| 6 | on         | ner     |
| 6 | on         | neville |
| 6 | oundary    |         |
| 6 | utte       |         |
| 6 | Camas      |         |
| 5 | Canyon     |         |
| 6 | Caribou    |         |
| 5 | Cassia     |         |
| 6 | Clark      |         |
| 5 | Clearwater |         |
| 6 | Custer     |         |
| 5 | Elmore     |         |
| 6 | Franklin   |         |
| 6 | Fremont    |         |
| 5 | Gem        |         |
| 5 | Gooding    |         |
| 5 | Idaho      |         |
| 6 | jefferson  |         |
| 5 | jerome     |         |
| 5 | kootenai   |         |
| 5 | Latah      |         |
| 6 | Lemhi      |         |
| 5 | Lewis      |         |
| 5 | Lincoln    |         |
| 6 | madison    |         |
| 5 | minidoka   |         |
| 5 | Nez Perce  |         |
| 6 | Oneida     |         |
| 5 | Owyhee     |         |
| 5 | Payette    |         |
| 5 | Power      |         |
| 5 | Shoshone   |         |
| 6 | Teton      |         |
| 5 | Twin Falls |         |

# 6 Valley

# 5 Washington

# I I OI

# 5A Adams

# 4A Alexander

# 4A ond

# 5A oone

# 5A rown

# 5A ureau

# 4A Calhoun

# 5A Carroll

# 5A Cass

# 5A Champaign

# 4A Christian

# 4A Clark

# 4A Clay

# 4A Clinton

# 4A Coles

# 5A Cook

# 4A Crawford

# 4A Cumberland

# 5A De alb

# 5A De Witt

# 5A Douglas

# 5A DuPage

# 5A Edgar

# 4A Edwards

# 4A Effingham

# 4A Fayette

# 5A Ford

# 4A Franklin

# 5A Fulton

# 4A Gallatin

# 4A Greene

# 5A Grundy
# 4A

- Hamilton
- Hardin
- Jackson
- Jasper
- Jefferson
- Jersey
- Macoupin
- Madison
- Marion
- Monroe

# 5A

- Hancock
- Henderson
- Henry
- Iroquois
- Kendall
- KnoX
- Lake
- La Salle
- Lee
- Livingston
- Logan
- Marshall
- Mason
- McDonough
- McHenry
- McLean
- Menard
- Mercer
# 4A

- Montgomery
- Organ
- Outrie
- Ogle
- Peoria
- Perry
- Piatt
- Pike
- Pope
- Pulaski
- Putnam
- Randolph
- Richland
- Rock Island
- Saline
- Sangamon
- Schuyler
- Scott
- Shelby
- Stark
- St. Clair
- Stephenson
- Tazewell
- Union
- Vermilion
- Wabash
- Warren
- Washington
- Wayne
- White
- Whiteside
- Will
- Williamson
- Winnebago
- Woodford
# 5A

- Adams
- Allen
- Carroll
- Cass
- Clinton
- Dealb
- Delaware
- Fountain
- Grant
- Hamilton
- Hancock
- Henry
- Howard

# 4A

- Artholomew
- Brown
- Clark
- Clay
- Crawford
- Daviess
- Dearborn
- Decatur
- Dubois
- Fayette
- Floyd
- Franklin
- Gibson
- Greene
- Harrison
- Hendricks
# 5A

Huntington

# 4A

Jackson

# 5A

Kasper

# 5A

Ray

# 4A

Jefferson

# 4A

Jennings

# 4A

Johnson

# 4A

Knox

# 5A

Kosciusko

# 5A

LaGrange

# 5A

Lake

# 5A

LaPorte

# 4A

Lawrence

# 5A

Madison

# 4A

Marion

# 5A

Marshall

# 4A

Martin

# 5A

Miami

# 4A

Monroe

# 5A

Montgomery

# 4A

Morgan

# 5A

Newton

# 5A

Noble

# 4A

Ohio

# 4A

Orange

# 4A

Owen

# 5A

Parke

# 4A

Perry

# 4A

Pike

# 5A

Porter

# 4A

Posey

# 5A

Pulaski

# 4A

Putnam

# 5A

Randolph

# 4A

Ripley
# 4A

- Rush
- Scott
- Shelby
- Spencer
- Sullivan
- Switzerland
- Vanderburgh
- Vigo
- Warrick
- Washington

# 5A

- Starke
- Steuben
- St. Joseph
- Tippecanoe
- Tipton
- Wabash
- Warren
- Wayne
- Wells
- White
- Whitley
- Adair
- Adams
- Allamakee
- Appanoose
- Audubon
- Benton
- Boone
- Bremer
- Buchanan
- Buena Vista

# 6A

- Black Hawk
# 5A

- Butler
- Calhoun
- Carroll
- Cass
- Cedar
- Cerro Gordo
- Cherokee
- Chickasaw
- Clarke
- Clay
- Clayton
- Clinton
- Crawford
- Dallas
- Davis
- Decatur
- Delaware
- Des Moines
- Dubuque
- Emmet
- Fayette
- Floyd
- Franklin
- Fremont
- Greene
- Grundy
- Guthrie
- Hamilton
- Hancock
- Hardin
- Harrison
- Henry
- Howard
- Humboldt
# 5A

- Ida
- Iowa
- Jackson
- Jasper
- Jefferson
- Johnson
- Jones
- Keokuk
- Lee
- Linn
- Louisa
- Lucas
- Madison
- Mahaska
- Marion
- Marshall
- Mills
- Monona
- Monroe
- Montgomery
- Muscatine
- Page
- Palo Alto
- Plymouth
- Pocahontas
- Polk
- Pottawattamie
- Poweshiek
- Ringgold
- Sac

# 6A

- Kossuth
- Lyon
- Mitchell
- O'Brien
- Osceola
# 5A

- Scott
- Shelby
- Sioux
- Story
- Tama
- Taylor
- Union
- Van Buren
- Wapello
- Warren
- Washington
- Wayne
- Webster
- Winnebago
- Winneshiek
- Woodbury
- Worth
- Wright

# 4A

- Allen
- Anderson
- Atchison
- Barber
- Carton
- Bourbon
- Brown
- Butler
- Chase
- Chautauqua
- Cherokee
- Cheyenne
- Clark
- Clay
- Cloud
- Coffey
# 4A

- Comanche
- Cowley
- Crawford
- Dickinson
- Doniphan
- Douglas
- Edwards
- Elk
- Ellis
- Ellsworth
- Finney
- Ford
- Franklin
- Geary
- Graham
- Grant
- Gray
- Greenwood
- Hamilton
- Harper
- Harvey
- Haskell
- Hodgeman
- Jackson
- Jefferson
- Johnson
- Kearny
- Kingman
- Labette
- Lane

# 5A

- Decatur
- Gove
- Greeley
# 4A

- Leavenworth
- Lincoln
- Linn
- Lyon
- Marion
- Marshall
- McPherson
- Meade
- Miami
- Mitchell
- Montgomery
- Morris
- Morton
- Nebraska
- Nemaha
- Neosho
- Ness
- Osage
- Osborne
- Ottawa
- Pawnee
- Pottawatomie
- Pratt
- Reno
- Rice
- Riley
- Rooks
- Rush
- Russell
- Saline
- Scott

# 5A

- Logan
- Norton
- Phillips
- Rawlins
- Republic
# 4A

- Sedgwick
- Seward
- Shawnee
- Sheridan
- Sherman
- Smith
- Stafford
- Stanton
- Stevens
- Sumner
- Thomas
- Trego
- Wabaunsee
- Wallace
- Washington
- Wichita
- Wilson
- Woodson
- Wyandotte

# 2A

- Acadia
- Allen
- Ascension
- Assumption
- Avoyelles
- Beauregard
- Bienville
- Bossier
- Caddo
- Calcasieu
- Caldwell
- Cameron
- Catahoula
# 3A

- Claiborne
- Concordia
- De Soto
- East Baton Rouge
- East Carroll
- East Feliciana
- Evangeline
- Franklin
- Grant
- Iberia
- Iberville
- Jackson
- Jefferson
- Jefferson Davis
- Lafayette
- Lafourche
- La Salle
- Lincoln
- Livingston
- Madison
- Morehouse
- Natchitoches
- Orleans
- Ouachita
- Plaquemines
- Pointe Coupee
- Rapides
- Red River
- Richland
- Sabine

# 2A

- East Baton Rouge
- East Feliciana
- Evangeline
- Iberia
- Iberville
- Jefferson
- Jefferson Davis
- Lafayette
- Lafourche
- Livingston
- Orleans
- Plaquemines
- Pointe Coupee
- Rapides
- St. Bernard
- St. Charles
- St. Helena
- St. James
- St. John the Baptist
# 2A

- St. Landry
- St. Martin
- St. Mary
- St. Tammany
- Tangipahoa
- Tensas
- Terrebonne
- Union
- Vermilion
- Vernon
- Washington
- Webster
- West Baton Rouge
- West Carroll
- West Feliciana
- Winn

# I

- Androscoggin
- Aroostook
- Cumberland
- Franklin
- Hancock
- Kennebec
- Knox
- Lincoln
- Oxford
- Penobscot
- Piscataquis
- Sagadahoc
- Somerset
- Waldo
- Washington
- York

# RY

- Allegany
# 4A

# Anne Arundel

# Baltimore

# Baltimore (city)

# Calvert

# Caroline

# Carroll

# Cecil

# Charles

# Dorchester

# Frederick

# 5A

# Garrett

# Harford

# Howard

# Kent

# Montgomery

# Prince George's

# Queen Anne's

# Somerset

# St. Mary's

# Talbot

# Washington

# Wicomico

# Worcester

# 5A (all)

# ICHIG

# 6A Alcona

# 6A Alger

# 5A Allegan

# 6A Alpena

# 6A Antrim

# 6A Arenac

# 6A Baraga

# 5A Barry

# 5A Bay
# 6A

en ie

# 5A

errien

ranch

Calhoun

Cass

# 6A

Charlevoix

Cheboygan

Chippewa

Clare

# 5A

Clinton

# 6A

Crawford

Delta

Dickinson

# 5A

Eaton

# 6A

Emmet

# 5A

Genesee

# 6A

Gladwin

Gogebic

Grand Traverse

# 5A

Gratiot

Hillsdale

# 6A

Houghton

# 5A

Huron

Ingham

Ionia

# 6A

Iosco

Iron

Isabella

# 5A

ackson

alama oo

# 6A

alkaska

ent

# 7

eweenaw

# 6A

Lake

# 5A

Lapeer
# 6A

Leelanau

# 5A

Lenawee

Livingston

# 6A

Luce

ackinac

# 5A

acomb

# 6A

anistee

# 7

ar uette

# 6A

ason

ecosta

enominee

# 5A

idland

# 6A

issaukee

# 5A

onroe

ontcalm

# 6A

ontmorency

# 5A

uskegon

# 6A

Newaygo

# 5A

Oakland

# 6A

Oceana

Ogemaw

Ontonagon

Osceola

Oscoda

Otsego

# 5A

Ottawa

# 6A

Pres ue Isle

# 6A

Roscommon

# 5A

Saginaw

Sanilac

# 6A

Schoolcraft

# 5A

Shiawassee

St. Clair

St.  oseph

Tuscola
# 5A

Van Uren

Washtenaw

Wayne

# 6A

Wexford

# 7

Aitkin

# 6A

Anoka

Becker

# 7

Beltrami

# 6A

Henton

Big Stone

Blue Earth

Brown

# 7

Carlton

# 6A

Carver

# 7

Cass

# 6A

Chippewa

Chisago

Clay

# 7

Clearwater

Cook

# 6A

Cottonwood

# 7

Crow Wing

# 6A

Dakota

Dodge

Douglas

Faribault

# 5A

Fillmore

# 6A

Freeborn

Goodhue

Grant

Hennepin

# 5A

Houston

# 7

Hubbard

# 6A

Isanti
# 7 Itasca

# 6A Jackson

# 6A Anabec

# 6A Kandiyohi

# 7 Itsson

# 7 Koochiching

# 6A Lac Qui Parle

# 7 Lake

# 7 Lake of the Woods

# 6A Le Sueur

# 6A Lincoln

# 6A Lyon

# 7 Mahnomen

# 7 Marshall

# 6A Martin

# 6A McLeod

# 6A Becker

# 6A Mille Lacs

# 6A Morrison

# 6A Power

# 6A Murray

# 6A Nicollet

# 6A Nobles

# 7 Norman

# 6A Olmsted

# 6A Otter Tail

# 7 Pennington

# 7 Pine

# 6A Pipestone

# 7 Polk

# 6A Pope

# 6A Ramsey

# 7 Red Lake

# 6A Redwood

# 6A Renville
# 6A

- Rice
- Rock
- Roseau
- Scott
- Sherburne
- Sibley
- Stearns
- Steele
- Stevens
- St. Louis
- Swift
- Todd
- Traverse
- Wabasha
- Wadena
- Waseca
- Washington
- Watonwan
- Wilkin
- Winona
- Wright
- Yellow Medicine

# 3A

- Adams
- Alcorn
- Amite
- Attala
- Benton
- Bolivar
- Calhoun
- Carroll
- Chickasaw
- Choctaw
- Claiborne
- Clarke
# 3A

- Clay
- Coahoma
- Copiah
- Covington
- DeSoto
- Forrest
- Franklin
- Greene
- Grenada
- Hinds
- Holmes
- Humphreys
- Issaquena
- Itawamba
- Lafayette
- Lamar
- Lauderdale
- Lawrence
- Leake
- Lee
- Leflore
- Lincoln
- Lowndes
- Madison
- Marion
- Marshall

# 2A

- George
- Hancock
- Harrison
# 3A

- Monroe
- Montgomery
- Neshoba
- Newton
- Noxubee
- Oktibbeha
- Panola
- Pearl River
- Perry
- Pike
- Pontotoc
- Prentiss
- Quitman
- Rankin
- Scott
- Sharkey
- Simpson
- Smith

# 2A

- Stone

# 3A

- Sunflower
- Tallahatchie
- Tate
- Tippah
- Tishomingo
- Tunica
- Union
- Walthall
- Warren
- Washington
- Wayne
- Webster
- Wilkinson
- Winston
- Yalobusha
- Yazoo
# Current Page

| 5A | Adair          |
| -- | -------------- |
| 5A | Andrew         |
| 5A | Atchison       |
| 4A | Audrain        |
| 4A | arry           |
| 4A | arton          |
| 4A | ates           |
| 4A | enton          |
| 4A | ollinger       |
| 4A | oone           |
| 4A | uchanan        |
| 4A | utler          |
| 4A | Caldwell       |
| 4A | Callaway       |
| 4A | Camden         |
| 4A | Cape Girardeau |
| 4A | Carroll        |
| 4A | Carter         |
| 4A | Cass           |
| 4A | Cedar          |
| 4A | Chariton       |
| 4A | Christian      |
| 5A | Clark          |
| 4A | Clay           |
| 4A | Clinton        |
| 4A | Cole           |
| 4A | Cooper         |
| 4A | Crawford       |
| 4A | Dade           |
| 4A | Dallas         |
| 5A | Daviess        |
| 5A | De alb         |
| 4A | Dent           |
| 4A | Douglas        |

# 3A

Dunklin

# 4A

Franklin

Gasconade

# 5A

Gentry

# 4A

Greene

# 5A

Grundy

# 5A

Harrison

# 4A

Henry

# 4A

Hickory

# 5A

Holt

# 4A

Howard

# 4A

Howell

# 4A

Iron

# 4A

Jackson

# 4A

Lasper

# 4A

Jefferson

# 4A

Johnson

# 5A

Knox

# 4A

Laclede

# 4A

Lafayette

# 4A

Lawrence

# 5A

Lewis

# 4A

Lincoln

# 5A

Linn

# 5A

Livingston

# 5A

Macron

# 4A

Madison

# 4A

Maries

# 5A

Marion

# 4A

McDonald

# 5A

Mercer

# 4A

Miller

# 4A

Mississippi

# 4A

Moniteau

# 4A

Monroe
# 4A

- Montgomery
- Organ
- New Madrid
- Newton
- Nodaway
- Oregon
- Osage
- Oark
- Pemiscot
- Perry
- Pettis
- Phelps
- Pike
- Platte
- Polk
- Pulaski
- Putnam
- Ralls
- Randolph
- Ray
- Reynolds
- Ripley
- Saline
- Schuyler
- Scotland
- Scott
- Shannon
- Shelby
- St. Charles
- St. Clair
- St. Francois
- St. Louis
- St. Louis (city)
- Ste. Genevieve
- Stoddard
# 4A

- Stone
- Sullivan
- Taney
- Texas
- Vernon
- Warren
- Washington
- Wayne
- Webster
- Worth
- Wright

# O T

- 6 (all)
- R
- 5A (all)

# 4

- Carson City (city)
- Churchill
- Clark
- Douglas
- Elko
- Esmeralda
- Eureka
- Humboldt
- Lander
- Lincoln
- Lyon
- Mineral
- Nye
- Pershing
- Storey
- Washoe
- White Pine

# H P HIR

- 6A
- Elknap
# 6A

- Carroll
- Cheshire
- Coos
- Grafton

# 5A

- Hillsborough
- Merrimack
- Rockingham
- Strafford
- Sullivan

# 4A

- Atlantic
- Bergen
- Burlington
- Camden
- Cape May
- Cumberland
- Essex
- Gloucester
- Hudson
- Hunterdon
- Mercer
- Middlesex
- Monmouth
- Morris
- Ocean
- Passaic
- Salem
- Somerset
- Sussex
- Union
- Warren

# 4

- Bernalillo
- Catron

# 3

- Chaves
# 4 Cibola

# 5 Colfax

# 4 Curry

# 4 De aca

# 3 Do a Ana

# 3 Eddy

# 4 Grant

# 4 Guadalupe

# 5 Harding

# 3 Hidalgo

# 3 Lea

# 4 Lincoln

# 5 Los Alamos

# 3 Luna

# 5 c inley

# 5 ora

# 3 Otero

# 4 uay

# 5 Rio Arriba

# 4 Roosevelt

# 5 Sandoval

# 5 San uan

# 5 San iguel

# 5 Santa Fe

# 3 Sierra

# 4 Socorro

# 5 Taos

# 5 Torrance

# 4 Union

# 4 Valencia

# YOR

# 5A Albany

# 5A Allegany

# 4A ronx

# 5A roome
# 5A

- Cattaraugus
- Cayuga
- Chautauqua
- Chemung
- Columbia
- Cortland
- Genesee
- Greene
- Livingston
- Monroe
- Niagara
- Onondaga
- Ontario
- Orange
- Orleans
- Oswego

# 6A

- Chenango
- Clinton
- Delaware
- Essex
- Franklin
- Fulton
- Hamilton
- Herkimer
- Jefferson
- Lewis
- Madison
- Oneida
- Otsego

# 4A

- Kings
- Nassau
- New York
# 5A Putnam

# 4A Queens

# 5A Rensselaer

# 4A Richmond

# 5A Rockland

# 5A Saratoga

# 5A Schenectady

# 5A Schoharie

# 5A Schuyler

# 5A Seneca

# 5A Steuben

# 6A St. Lawrence

# 4A Suffolk

# 6A Sullivan

# 5A Tioga

# 5A Tompkins

# 6A Ulster

# 6A Warren

# 5A Washington

# 5A Wayne

# 4A Westchester

# 5A Wyoming

# 5A Yates

# ORTH C RO I

# 3A Alamance

# 3A Alexander

# 5A Alleghany

# 3A Anson

# 5A Ashe

# 5A Avery

# 3A Beaufort

# 3A Bertie

# 3A Bladen

# 3A Brunswick

# 4A Buncombe
# 4A

- urke
- Cabarrus
- Caldwell

# 3A

- Camden
- Carteret
- Caswell
- Catawba
- Chatham
- Cherokee
- Chowan
- Clay
- Cleveland
- Columbus
- Craven
- Cumberland
- Currituck
- Dare
- Davidson
- Davie
- Duplin
- Durham
- Edgecombe
- Forsyth
- Franklin
- Gaston
- Gates
- Granville
- Greene
- Guilford
- Halifax
- Harnett

# 4A

- Haywood
- Henderson

# 3A

- Hertford
# 3A

- Hoke
- Hyde
- Iredell
- Johnston
- Jones
- Lee
- Lenoir
- Lincoln
- Mecklenburg
- Montgomery
- Moore
- Nash
- New Hanover
- Northampton
- Onslow
- Orange
- Pamlico
- Pasquotank
- Pender
- Perquimans
- Person
- Pitt
- Polk
- Randolph
- Richmond
- Robeson
- Rockingham
- Rowan
- Rutherford

# 4A

- Jackson
- MacDowell
- Mitchell
# 3A

- Sampson
- Scotland
- Stanly
- Tyrrell
- Union
- Vance
- Wake
- Warren
- Washington
- Wayne
- Wilkes
- Wilson

# 4A

- Stokes
- Surry
- Swain
- Transylvania
- Yadkin

# 5A

- Watauga
- Yancey

# 6A

- Adams
- Barnes
- Dickey
- Dunn
- Eddy
- Emmons
- Howman
- Burke
- Curleigh
- Cass

# 7

- Henson
- Billings
- Cavalier
- Divide
- Rottineau
# 6A

- Foster
- Golden Valley
- Grand Forks
- Grant
- Griggs
- Hettinger
- Kidder
- LaMoure
- Logan
- McHenry
- McIntosh
- McKenzie
- McLean
- Mercer
- Morton
- Mountain
- Nelson
- Oliver

# 7

- Pembina
- Pierce
- Ramsey
- Ransom
- Renville
- Richland
- Rolette
- Sargent
- Sheridan
- Sioux
- Slope
- Stark
- Steele
- Stutsman
- Towner
- Traill
- Walsh
# 7 Ward

# 6A

Wells

Williams

# OHIO

# 4A

Adams

# 5A

Allen

Ashland

Ashtabula

# 4A

Athens

# 5A

Auglaize

Belmont

# 4A

Brown

Butler

# 5A

Carroll

Champaign

Clark

# 4A

Clermont

Clinton

# 5A

Columbiana

Coshocton

Crawford

Cuyahoga

Darke

Defiance

Delaware

Erie

Fairfield

# 4A

Fayette

Franklin

# 5A

Fulton

# 4A

Gallia

# 5A

Geauga

# 4A

Greene

# 5A

Guernsey

# 4A

Hamilton
# 5A

- Hancock
- Hardin
- Harrison
- Henry
- Holmes
- Huron
- Jefferson
- Knox
- Lake
- Licking
- Logan
- Lorain
- Lucas
- Noble
- Ottawa
- Paulding
- Perry

# 4A

- Highland
- Hocking
- Jackson
- Lawrence
- Madison
- Pike
- Pickaway

# 5A

- Mahoning
- Marion
- Medina
- Mercer
- Miami
- Monroe
- Montgomery
- Morgan
- Muskingum
# 5A Schools

- Portage
- Preble
- Putnam
- Richland
- Sandusky
- Seneca
- Shelby
- Stark
- Summit
- Trumbull
- Tuscarawas
- Union
- Van Wert
- Wayne
- Williams
- Wood
- Wyandot

# 4A Schools

- Ross
- Scioto
- Vinton
- Warren
- Washington

# 3A Schools

- Adair
- Alfalfa
- Atoka
- Beaver
- Beckham
- Blain
- Bryan
- Caddo
- Canadian
- Carter
- Cherokee
- Choctaw
# 4

# Cimarron

# 3A Cleveland

# 3A Coal

# 3A Comanche

# 3A Cotton

# 4A Craig

# 3A Creek

# 3A Custer

# 4A Delaware

# 3A Dewey

# 4A Ellis

# 4A Garfield

# 3A Garvin

# 3A Grady

# 4A Grant

# 3A Greer

# 3A Harmon

# 4A Harper

# 3A Haskell

# 3A Hughes

# 3A Jackson

# 3A Jefferson

# 3A Johnston

# 4A Kay

# 3A Kingfisher

# 3A Kiowa

# 3A Latimer

# 3A Le Flore

# 3A Lincoln

# 3A Logan

# 3A Love

# 4A Major

# 3A Marshall

# 3A Mayes

# 3A McClain
# 3A

Curtain

cIntosh

urray

uskogee

Noble

# 4A

Nowata

# 3A

Okfuskee

Oklahoma

Okmulgee

# 4A

Osage

Ottawa

# 3A

Pawnee

Payne

Pittsburg

Pontotoc

Pottawatomie

Pushmataha

Roger  ills

Rogers

Seminole

Se uoyah

Stephens

# 4

Texas

Tillman

Tulsa

Wagoner

# 4A

Washington

Washita

# 4A

Woods

Woodward

# OR GO

5   aker

# 4C

enton

# 4C

Clackamas

# 4C

Clatsop
# 4C Columbia

# 4C Coos

# 5 Crook

# 4C Curry

# 5 Deschutes

# 4C Douglas

# 5 Gilliam

# 5 Grant

# 5 Harney

# 5 Hood River

# 4C Jackson

# 5 Jefferson

# 4C Josephine

# 5 Klamath

# 5 Lake

# 4C Lane

# 4C Lincoln

# 4C Linn

# 5 Malheur

# 4C Marion

# 5 Morrow

# 4C Multnomah

# 4C Polk

# 5 Sherman

# 4C Tillamook

# 5 Umatilla

# 5 Union

# 5 Wallowa

# 5 Wasco

# 4C Washington

# 5 Wheeler

# 4C Yamhill

# P Y I

# 4A Adams

# 5A Allegheny
# 5A

- Armstrong
- Beaver
- Bedford
- Berks
- Clair
- Radford
- Bucks
- Butler
- Cambria
- Cameron
- Carbon
- Centre
- Chester
- Clarion
- Clearfield
- Clinton
- Columbia
- Crawford
- Cumberland
- Dauphin
- Delaware
- Elk
- Erie
- Fayette
- Forest
- Franklin
- Fulton
- Greene
- Huntingdon
- Indiana
- Jefferson
- Juniata
- Lackawanna
- Lancaster
- Lawrence

# 4A

- Berks
- Cumberland
- Dauphin
- Delaware
- Franklin
- Lancaster
# 4A

- Lebanon
- Lehigh
- Lu erne
- Lycoming
- c ean
- ercer
- ifflin
- onroe
- ontgomery
- ontour
- Northampton
- Northumberland
- Perry
- Philadelphia
- Pike
- Potter
- Schuylkill
- Snyder
- Somerset
- Sullivan
- Sus uehanna
- Tioga
- Union
- Venango
- Warren
- Washington
- Wayne
- Westmoreland
- Wyoming
- York

# RHO I

- (all)

# O TH C RO I

# 3A

- Abbeville
- Aiken
# 3A

- Allendale
- Anderson
- Amberg
- Arnwell
- 2A
- Eaufort
- 3A
- Erkeley
- Calhoun
- Charleston
- Cherokee
- Chester
- Chesterfield
- Clarendon
- Colleton
- Darlington
- Dillon
- Dorchester
- Edgefield
- Fairfield
- Florence
- Georgetown
- Greenville
- Greenwood
- Hampton
- Horry
- 2A
- Asper
- 3A
- Erskhaw
- Lancaster
- Laurens
- Lee
- Lexington
- 3A
- Marion
- 3A
- Charlboro
- McCormick
- Newberry
- Oconee
# 3A

- Orangeburg
- Pickens
- Richland
- Saluda
- Spartanburg
- Sumter
- Union
- Williamsburg
- York

# 6A

- Aurora
- eadle
- ennett
- on Homme
- rookings
- brown
- rule
- uffalo
- utte
- Campbell
- Charles ix
- Clark
- Clay
- Codington
- Corson
- Custer
- Davison
- Day
- Deuel
- Dewey
- Douglas
- Edmunds
- Fall River
- Faulk
- Grant
# 5A

- Gregory
- Haakon
- Hutchinson
- Lyman
- Jackson
- Pellette
- Stanley
- Todd

# 6A

- Hamlin
- Hand
- Hanson
- Harding
- Hughes
- Hyde
- Gerald
- Jones
- Kingsbury
- Lake
- Lawrence
- Lincoln
- Marshall
- McCook
- McPherson
- Meade
- Miner
- Minnehaha
- Moody
- Pennington
- Perkins
- Potter
- Roberts
- Sanborn
- Shannon
- Spink
- Sully
# 5A

- Tripp
- Turner
- Union
- Walworth
- Yankton
- iebach

# 4A

- Anderson
- edford
- enton
- ledsoe
- lount
- radley
- Campbell
- Cannon
- Carroll
- Carter
- Cheatham
- Claiborne
- Clay
- Cocke
- Cumberland

# 3A

- Chester
- Coffee
- Crockett
- Davidson
- Decatur
- Dyer
- Fayette
- Franklin
- Gibson
- Giles

# 4A

- Fentress
# 4A

- Grainger
- Greene
- Grundy
- Hamblen
- Hamilton
- Hancock
- Hardeman
- Hardin
- Hawkins
- Haywood
- Henderson
- Henry
- Hickman
- Houston
- Humphreys
- Jackson
- Jefferson
- Johnson
- KNOX
- Lake

# 3A

- Lauderdale
- Lawrence
- Lewis
- Lincoln
- Loudon
- Madison
- Marion
- Marshall
- Maury
- McMinn
- McNairy

# 4A

- Meigs
- Monroe
- Montgomery
# 3A

oore

# 4A

organ

Obion

Overton

# 3A

Perry

# 4A

Pickett

Polk

Putnam

Rhea

Roane

Robertson

# 3A

Rutherford

# 4A

Scott

Se uatchie

Sevier

# 3A

Shelby

# 4A

Smith

Stewart

Sullivan

Sumner

# 3A

Tipton

# 4A

Trousdale

Unicoi

Union

Van  uren

Warren

Washington

# 3A

Wayne

# 4A

Weakley

White

# 3A

Williamson

# 4A

Wilson

# 2A

Anderson

# 3

Andrews
# 2A

Angelina

# 2A

Aransas

# 3A

Archer

# 4

Armstrong

# 2A

Atascosa

# 2A

Austin

# 4

ailey

# 2

andera

# 2A

astrop

# 3

aylor

# 2A

ee

# 2A

ell

# 2A

exar

# 3A

lanco

# 3

orden

# 2A

os ue

# 3A

owie

# 2A

ra oria

# 2A

ra os

# 3

rewster

# 4

riscoe

# 2A

brooks

# 3A

brown

# 2A

urleson

# 3A

urnet

# 2A

Caldwell

# 2A

Calhoun

# 3

Callahan

# 1A

Cameron

# 3A

Camp

# 4

Carson

# 3A

Cass

# 4

Castro

# 2A

Chambers

# 2A

Cherokee
# 3

Childress

# 3A

Clay

# 4

Cochran

# 3

Coke

# 3

Coleman

# 3A

Collin

# 3

Collingsworth

# 2A

Colorado

# 2A

Comal

# 3A

Comanche

# 3

Concho

# 3A

Cooke

# 2A

Coryell

# 3

Cottle

# 3

Crane

# 3

Crockett

# 3

Crosby

# 3

Culberson

# 4

Dallam

# 2A

Dallas

# 3

Dawson

# 4

Deaf Smith

# 3A

Delta

# 3A

Denton

# 2A

DeWitt

# 3

Dickens

# 2

Dimmit

# 4

Donley

# 2A

Duval

# 3A

Eastland

# 3

Ector

# 2

Edwards

# 2A

Ellis

# 3

El Paso

# 3A

Erath
# 2A Falls

# 3A Fannin

# 2A Fayette

# 3 Fisher

# 4 Floyd

# 3 Foard

# 2A Fort end

# 3A Franklin

# 2A Freestone

# 2 Frio

# 3 Gaines

# 2A Galveston

# 3 Gar a

# 3A Gillespie

# 3 Glasscock

# 2A Goliad

# 2A Gon ales

# 4 Gray

# 3A Grayson

# 3A Gregg

# 2A Grimes

# 2A Guadalupe

# 4 Hale

# 3 Hall

# 3A Hamilton

# 4 Hansford

# 3 Hardeman

# 2A Hardin

# 2A Harris

# 3A Harrison

# 4 Hartley

# 3 Haskell

# 2A Hays

# 3 Hemphill

# 3A Henderson
# 1A Hidalgo

# 2A Hill

# 4 Hockley

# 3A Hood

# 3A Hopkins

# 2A Houston

# 3 Howard

# 3 Hudspeth

# 3A Hunt

# 4 Hutchinson

# 3 Irion

# 3A ack

# 2A ackson

# 2A asper

# 3 eff Davis

# 2A efferson

# 2A im Hogg

# 2A im Wells

# 2A ohnson

# 3 ones

# 2A arnes

# 3A aufman

# 3A endall

# 2A enedy

# 3 ent

# 3 err

# 3 imble

# 3 ing

# 2 inney

# 2A leberg

# 3 nox

# 3A Lamar

# 4 Lamb

# 3A Lampasas

# 2 La Salle
# 2A

- Lavaca
- Lee
- Leon
- Liberty
- Limestone
- Lipscomb
- Live Oak
- Navarro
- Newton

# 3A

- Llano
- Nacogdoches

# 3

- Loving
- Lubbock
- Lynn
- Martin
- Jason
- McCulloch
- Montague
- Moore
- Morris
- Otley

# 2A

- Adison
- Matagorda
- Cameron
- Cullen

# 2

- Hidalgo

# 3A

- Hills

# 3

- Mitchell

# 2A

- Harrison
# 2A

Nueces

# 4

Ochiltree

Oldham

# 2A

Orange

# 3A

Palo Pinto

Panola

Parker

# 4

Parmer

# 3

Pecos

# 2A

Polk

# 4

Potter

# 3

Presidio

# 3A

Rains

# 4

Randall

# 3

Reagan

# 2

Real

# 3A

Red River

# 3

Reeves

# 2A

Refugio

# 4

Roberts

# 2A

Robertson

# 3A

Rockwall

# 3

Runnels

# 3A

Rusk

# 3A

Sabine

# 3A

San Augustine

# 2A

San Jacinto

# 2A

San Patricio

# 3A

San Saba

# 3

Schleicher

# 3

Scurry

# 3

Shackelford

# 3A

Shelby

# 4

Sherman

# 3A

Smith
# Current Page

# Counties

| 3A | Somervell    |
| -- | ------------ |
| 2A | Starr        |
| 3A | Stephens     |
| 3  | Sterling     |
| 3  | Stonewall    |
| 3  | Sutton       |
| 4  | Swisher      |
| 2A | Tarrant      |
| 3  | Taylor       |
| 3  | Terrell      |
| 3  | Terry        |
| 3  | Throckmorton |
| 3A | Titus        |
| 3  | Tom Green    |
| 2A | Travis       |
| 2A | Trinity      |
| 2A | Tyler        |
| 3A | Upshur       |
| 3  | Upton        |
| 2  | Uvalde       |
| 2  | Val Verde    |
| 3A | Van Zandt    |
| 2A | Victoria     |
| 2A | Walker       |
| 2A | Waller       |
| 3  | Ward         |
| 2A | Washington   |
| 2  | Webb         |
| 2A | Wharton      |
| 3  | Wheeler      |
| 3A | Wichita      |
| 3  | Wilbarger    |
| 1A | Willacy      |
| 2A | Williamson   |
| 2A | Wilson       |

# 3

Winkler

# 3A

Wise

# 3A

Wood

# 4

Yoakum

# 3A

Young

# 2

apata

# 2

avala

# T H

# 5

eaver

# 5

ox Elder

# 5

Cache

# 5

Carbon

# 6

Daggett

# 5

Davis

# 6

Duchesne

# 5

Emery

# 5

Garfield

# 5

Grand

# 5

Iron

# 5

uab

# 5

ane

# 5

illard

# 6

organ

# 5

Piute

# 6

Rich

# 5

Salt Lake

# 5

San  uan

# 5

Sanpete

# 5

Sevier

# 6

Summit

# 5

Tooele

# 6

Uintah

# 5

Utah

# 6

Wasatch

# 3

Washington
# 5 Wayne

# 5 Weber

# R O T

# 6A (all)

# IRGI I

# 4A (all except as follows:)

5A Alleghany5A ath3A runswick3A Chesapeake5A Clifton Forge5A Covington3A Emporia3A Franklin3A Greensville3A Halifax3A Hampton5A Highland3A Isle of Wight3A ecklenburg3A Newport News3A Norfolk3A Pittsylvania3A Portsmouth3A South oston3A Southampton3A Suffolk3A Surry3A Sussex3A Virginia each
# HI GTO

# 5 Adams

# 5 Asotin

# 5 Benton

# 5 Chelan
# Counties

| 5C | Clallam      |
| -- | ------------ |
| 4C | Clark        |
| 5  | Columbia     |
| 4C | Cowlitz      |
| 5  | Douglas      |
| 6  | Ferry        |
| 5  | Franklin     |
| 5  | Garfield     |
| 5  | Grant        |
| 4C | Grays Harbor |
| 5C | Island       |
| 4C | Jefferson    |
| 4C | King         |
| 5C | Kitsap       |
| 5  | Kittitas     |
| 5  | Klickitat    |
| 4C | Lewis        |
| 5  | Lincoln      |
| 4C | Mason        |
| 5  | Okanogan     |
| 4C | Pacific      |
| 6  | Pend Oreille |
| 4C | Pierce       |
| 5C | San Juan     |
| 4C | Skagit       |
| 5  | Skamania     |
| 4C | Snohomish    |
| 5  | Spokane      |
| 6  | Stevens      |
| 4C | Thurston     |
| 4C | Wahkiakum    |
| 5  | Walla Walla  |
| 4C | Whatcom      |
| 5  | Whitman      |
| 5  | Yakima       |

# Current Page

| 5A | arbour     |
| -- | ---------- |
| 4A | erkeley    |
| 4A | oone       |
| 4A | raxton     |
| 5A | rooke      |
| 4A | Cabell     |
| 4A | Calhoun    |
| 4A | Clay       |
| 4A | Doddridge  |
| 4A | Fayette    |
| 4A | Gilmer     |
| 5A | Grant      |
| 4A | Greenbrier |
| 5A | Hampshire  |
| 5A | Hancock    |
| 5A | Hardy      |
| 5A | Harrison   |
| 4A | Jackson    |
| 4A | Jefferson  |
| 4A | Kanawha    |
| 4A | Lewis      |
| 4A | Lincoln    |
| 4A | Logan      |
| 5A | Marion     |
| 5A | Marshall   |
| 4A | Mason      |
| 4A | McDowell   |
| 4A | Mercer     |
| 5A | Mineral    |
| 4A | Mingo      |
| 5A | Monongalia |
| 4A | Monroe     |
| 4A | Morgan     |
| 4A | Nicholas   |

# 5A

- Ohio
- Pendleton
- Pocahontas
- Preston
- Randolph
- Taylor
- Tucker
- Wet el

# 4A

- Pleasants
- Putnam
- Raleigh
- Ritchie
- Roane
- Summers
- Tyler
- Upshur
- Wayne
- Webster
- Wirt
- Wood
- Wyoming

# 6A

- Ashland
- arron
- ayfield
- brown
- buffalo
- burnett
- Calumet
- Chippewa
- Clark
- Columbia
- Crawford
- Dane
# 5A

- Dodge
- Fond du Lac
- Grant
- Green
- Green Lake
- Iowa
- La Crosse
- Lafayette
- Milwaukee
- Monroe
- Outagamie
- Oshkosh

# 6A

- Door
- Douglas
- Dunn
- Eau Claire
- Florence
- Forest
- Iron
- Jackson
- Jefferson
- Juneau
- Kenosha
- Manitowoc
- Marathon
- Marinette
- Menominee
- Oconto
- Oneida
- Pepin
- Pierce
# 6A

- Polk
- Portage
- Price
- Racine
- Richland
- Rock
- Rusk
- Sauk
- Sawyer
- Shawano
- Sheboygan
- St. Croix
- Taylor
- Trempealeau
- Vernon
- Vilas
- Walworth
- Washburn
- Washington
- Waukesha
- Waupaca
- Waushara
- Winnebago
- Wood

# YO I G

- Albany
- ig Horn
- Campbell
- Carbon
- Converse
- Crook
- Fremont
- Goshen
- Hot Springs
- ohnson
# 5 Laramie

# 7 Lincoln

# 6 Natrona

# 6 Niobrara

# 6 Park

# 5 Platte

# 6 Sheridan

# 7 Sublette

# 6 Sweetwater

# 7 Teton

# 6 Uinta

# 6 Washakie

# 6 Weston

# T RRITORI

# RIC

# 1A (all)

# G

# 1A (all)

# ORTH R RI I

# 1A (all)

# P RTO RICO

# 1A (all except as follows:)

2 arra uitas

2 Cayey

# IRGI I

# 1A (all)

a. ey: A oist, Dry, C arine. Absence of moisture designation indicates moisture regime is irrelevant. Asterisk ( ) indicates a Warm Humid location.

# C H

# C H

In T C , Warm Humid counties are identified by an asterisk.

# C C

# C C

To determine the climate ones for locations not listed in this code, use the following information to determine climate one numbers and letters in accordance.
1. Determine the thermal climate zone, 0 through 8, from TC using the heating (HDD) and cooling degree-days (CDD) for the location.
2. Determine the moisture zone (Arid, Dry or Humid) in accordance with Items 2.1 through 2.3.
1. If monthly average temperature and precipitation data are available, use the Arid, Dry and Humid definitions to determine the moisture zone (C, D or A).
2. If annual average temperature information (including degree-days) and annual precipitation (i.e., annual mean) are available, use Items 2.2.1 through 2.2.3 to determine the moisture zone. If the moisture zone is not Arid, then use the Dry definition to determine whether Dry or Humid.
1. If thermal climate zone is 3 and CDD50 F ≥ 4,500 (CDD10 C ≥ 2,500), climate zone is Arid (3C).
2. If thermal climate zone is 4 and CDD50 F ≥ 2,700 (CDD10 C ≥ 1,500), climate zone is Arid (4C).
3. If thermal climate zone is 5 and CDD50 F ≥ 1,800 (CDD10 C ≥ 1,000), climate zone is Arid (5C).
3. If only degree-day information is available, use Items 2.3.1 through 2.3.3 to determine the moisture zone. If the moisture zone is not Arid, then it is not possible to assign Humid or Dry moisture zone for this location.
1. If thermal climate zone is 3 and CDD50 F ≥ 4,500 (CDD10 C ≥ 2,500), climate zone is Arid (3C).
2. If thermal climate zone is 4 and CDD50 F ≥ 2,700 (CDD10 C ≥ 1,500), climate zone is Arid (4C).
3. If thermal climate zone is 5 and CDD50 F ≥ 1,800 (CDD10 C ≥ 1,000), climate zone is Arid (5C).
3. Arid (C) zone definition: Locations meeting all the criteria in Items 3.1 through 3.4.
1. Mean temperature of coldest month between 27 F (-3 C) and 65 F (18 C).
2. Warmest month mean ≥ 72 F (22 C).
3. Not fewer than four months with mean temperatures over 50 F (10 C).
4. Dry season in summer. The month with the heaviest precipitation in the cold season has at least three times as much precipitation as the month with the least precipitation in the rest of the year. The cold season is October through March in the Northern Hemisphere and April through September in the Southern Hemisphere.
4. Dry (D) definition: Locations meeting the criteria in Items 4.1 through 4.4.
1. Not Arid (C).
2. If 70 percent or more of the precipitation, P, occurs during the high sun period, defined as April through September in the Northern Hemisphere and October through March in the Southern Hemisphere, then the dry/humid threshold is in accordance with the following:
| Annual precipitation, inches (mm). | Annual mean temperature, F (C). |
| ---------------------------------- | ------------------------------- |
3. If between 30 and 70 percent of the precipitation, P, occurs during the high sun period, defined as April through September in the Northern Hemisphere and October through March in the Southern Hemisphere, then the dry/humid threshold is in accordance with the following:
|   |   |
| - | - |

where:

- Annual precipitation, inches (mm).
- Annual mean temperature, F (C).

# 4.4.

If 30 percent or less of the precipitation, occurs during the high sun period, defined as April through September in the Northern Hemisphere and October through March in the Southern Hemisphere, then the dry/humid threshold is in accordance with.

where:

- Annual precipitation, inches (mm).
- Annual mean temperature, F (C).

# 5.

Humid (A) definition: Locations that are not Marine (C) or Dry (D).
# TH R C I T I O N

# TH R CRIT RI

| 0 | 10,800 CDD50 F            | 6000 CDD10 C             |
| - | ------------------------- | ------------------------ |
| 1 | ,000 CDD50 F 10,800       | 5000 CDD10 C 6000        |
| 2 | 6,300 CDD50 F ,000        | 3500 CDD10 C 5000        |
| 3 | CDD50 F 6,300 AND HDD65 F | CDD10 C 3500 AND HDD18 C |
| 4 | CDD50 F 6,300 AND 3,600   | CDD10 C 3500 AND 2000    |
| 5 | CDD50 F 6,300 AND 5,400   | CDD10 C 3500 AND 3000    |
| 6 | 7,200 HDD65 F ,000        | 4000 HDD18 C 5000        |
| 7 | ,000 HDD65 F 12,600       | 5000 HDD18 C 7000        |
| 8 | 12,600 HDD65 F            | 7000 HDD18 C             |

For SI: C (F) 32 /1.8.

# The tropical climate region shall be defined as:

1. Hawaii, Puerto Rico, Guam, American Samoa, US Virgin Islands, Commonwealth of Northern Mariana Islands and
2. Islands in the area between the Tropic of Cancer and the Tropic of Capricorn.

# CTIO C IG CO ITIO

The interior design temperatures used for heating and cooling load calculations shall be a maximum of 72 F (22 C) for heating and minimum of 75 F (24 C) for cooling.
Materials, systems and equipment shall be identified in a manner that will allow a determination of compliance with the applicable provisions of this code.

An R-value identification mark shall be applied by the manufacturer to each piece of building thermal envelope insulation 12 inches (305 mm) or greater in width. Alternatively, the insulation installers shall provide a certification listing the type, manufacturer and R-value of insulation installed in each element of the building thermal envelope. For blown-in or sprayed fiberglass and cellulose insulation, the initial installed thickness, settled thickness, settled R-value, installed density, coverage area and number of bags installed shall be indicated on the certification. For sprayed polyurethane foam (SPF) insulation, the installed thickness of the areas covered and R-value of installed thickness shall be indicated on the certification. For insulated siding, the R-value shall be labeled on the product's package and shall be indicated on the certification. The insulation installer shall sign, date and post the certification in a conspicuous location on the job site.

For roof insulation installed above the deck, the R-value shall be labeled as required by the material standards specified in Table 1508.2 of the International Building Code.

The thickness of blown-in or sprayed fiberglass and cellulose roof/ceiling insulation shall be written in inches (mm) on markers and one or more of such markers shall be installed for every 300 square feet (28 m²) of attic area throughout the attic space. The markers shall be affixed to the trusses or joists and marked with the minimum initial installed thickness with numbers not less than 1 inch (25 mm) in height. Each marker shall face the attic access opening. Spray polyurethane foam thickness and installed R-value shall be indicated on certification provided by the insulation installer.

Insulating materials shall be installed such that the manufacturer's R-value mark is readily observable upon inspection. For insulation materials that are installed without an observable manufacturer's R-value mark, such as blown or draped products, an insulation certificate complying with the applicable code shall be left immediately after installation by the installer, in a conspicuous location within the building, to certify the installed R-value of the insulation material.

For roof insulation installed above the deck, the R-value shall be labeled as
# Factors of Fenestration Products

Factors of fenestration products shall be determined as follows:

1. For windows, doors and skylights, factor ratings shall be determined in accordance with RC.
2. Where required for garage doors and rolling doors, factor ratings shall be determined in accordance with either RC or I.

Factors shall be determined by an accredited, independent laboratory, and labeled and certified by the manufacturer.

Products lacking such a labeled factor shall be assigned a default factor from T or T C.

The solar heat gain coefficient (SHGC) and visible transmittance (VT) of glazed fenestration products (windows, glazed doors and skylights) shall be determined in accordance with RC by an accredited, independent laboratory, and labeled and certified by the manufacturer. Products lacking such a labeled SHGC or VT shall be assigned a default SHGC or VT from T C.

For Tubular Daylighting Devices, VT annual shall be measured and rated in accordance with NFRC 203.
# Current Page

|                        | T         | C      |      |      |
| ---------------------- | --------- | ------ | ---- | ---- |
| T G                    | I O G OOR |        |      |      |
|                        |           | Y IGHT | CTOR |      |
| etal                   | 1.20      | 0.80   | 2.00 | 1.30 |
| etal with Thermal reak | 1.10      | 0.65   | 1.0  | 1.10 |
| Nonmetal or etal Clad  | 0.5       | 0.55   | 1.75 | 1.05 |
| Gla ed lock            |           | 0.60   |      |      |

# Table of Door Types and Their Factors

| Door Type                                                         | Factor |
| ----------------------------------------------------------------- | ------ |
| Uninsulated Metal                                                 | 1.20   |
| Insulated Metal (Rolling)                                         | 0.00   |
| Insulated Metal (Other)                                           | 0.60   |
| Wood                                                              | 0.50   |
| Insulated, nonmetal edge, max 45 glazing, any glazing double pane | 0.35   |

# Thermal Resistance and Insulation

|      | T   | G   | TR TIO | HGC | T   |
| ---- | --- | --- | ------ | --- | --- |
| SHGC | 0.8 | 0.7 | 0.7    | 0.6 | 0.6 |
| VT   | 0.6 | 0.3 | 0.6    | 0.3 | 0.6 |

The thermal resistance (R-value) of insulation shall be determined in accordance with the US Federal Trade Commission R-value rule (CFR Title 16, Part 460) in units of h·ft²·F/tu at a mean temperature of 75°F (24°C).

The thermal resistance (R-value) of insulated siding shall be determined in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. Installation for testing shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.

Materials, systems and equipment shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions and the International Building Code.

Insulation applied to the exterior of basement walls, crawl space walls and the perimeter of slab-on-grade floors shall have a rigid, opaque and weather-resistant protective covering to prevent the degradation of the insulation's thermal performance. The protective covering shall cover the exposed exterior insulation and extend not less than 6 inches (153 mm) below grade.

Where two or more layers of continuous insulation board are used in a construction assembly, the continuous insulation boards shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. Where the continuous insulation board manufacturer's instructions do not address installation of two or more layers, the edge points between each layer of continuous insulation boards shall be staggered.
# CHAPTER R

# Commercial Energy Efficiency Provisions

Commercial buildings shall comply with C or C.

Commercial buildings shall comply with one of the following:

1. Prescriptive Compliance. The Prescriptive Compliance option requires compliance with C through C and C. Dwelling units and sleeping units in Group R-2 buildings shall be deemed to be in compliance with this chapter, provided that they comply with R.
2. Simulated Building Performance. The Simulated Building Performance option requires compliance with C.

Additions, alterations, repairs and changes of occupancy to existing buildings complying with C.

# Thermal Envelope Requirements

A permanent thermal envelope certificate shall be completed by an approved party. Such certificate shall be posted on a wall in the space where the space conditioning equipment is located, a utility room or other approved location. If located on an...
electrical panel, the certificate shall not cover or obstruct the visibility of the circuit directory label, service disconnect label or other required labels. A copy of the certificate shall also be included in the construction files for the project. The certificate shall include the following:

1. values of insulation installed in or on ceilings, roofs, walls, foundations and slabs, basement walls, crawl space walls and floors and ducts outside conditioned spaces.
2. factors and solar heat gain coefficients (SHGC) of fenestrations.
3. Results from any building envelope air leakage testing performed on the building. Where there is more than one value for any component of the building envelope, the certificate shall indicate the area-weighted average value where available. If the area-weighted average is not available, the certificate shall list each value that applies to 10 percent or more of the total component area.

# CTIO C I I G OP R IR T

# CTIO C

# I I G OP R IR T

# C G

Building thermal envelope assemblies for buildings that are intended to comply with the code on a prescriptive basis in accordance with the compliance path described in Item 1 of C shall comply with the following:

1. The opaque portions of the building thermal envelope shall comply with the specific insulation requirements of C and the thermal requirements of either the U-, C- and F-factor based method of Section C402.1.2 or the R-value based method of C402.1.3 or the component performance alternative of C. Where the total area of the through-wall penetrations of mechanical equipment is greater than 1 percent of the opaque above-grade wall area, the building thermal envelope shall comply with Section C402.1.2.4.
2. Wall solar reflectance and thermal emittance shall comply with Section C402.3.
3. Roof solar reflectance and thermal emittance shall comply with Section C402.4.
4. Fenestration in building envelope assemblies shall comply with Section C402.5.
5. Air leakage of the building thermal envelope shall comply with C402.6.
6. Walk-in coolers, walk-in freezers, refrigerated warehouse coolers and refrigerated warehouse freezers shall comply with Section C403.12.
7. Vertical ridges in above grade walls shall comply with Section C402.7.

Alternatively, where buildings have a vertical fenestration area or skylight area exceeding that allowed in C, the building and building thermal envelope shall comply with Item 2 of C or C.

# C

The following low-energy buildings, or portions thereof separated from the remainder of the building by building thermal envelope assemblies complying with this section, shall be exempt from the building thermal envelope provisions of C.
# Buildings that comply with either of the following:

1. Those with a peak design rate of energy usage less than 3.4 tu/h ft (10.7 W/m²) or 1.0 watt per square foot (10.7 W/m²) of floor area for space conditioning purposes.
2. Those that do not contain conditioned space.

# Greenhouse structures or areas that are mechanically heated or cooled and that comply with all of the following shall be exempt from the building envelope requirements of this code:

1. Exterior opaque envelope assemblies comply with C and C.
2. Low energy greenhouses that comply with C.
3. Interior partition building thermal envelope assemblies that separate the greenhouse from conditioned space comply with C, C, and C.
4. Fenestration assemblies that comply with the thermal envelope requirements in T C. The U-factor for a roof shall be for the roof assembly or a roof that includes the assembly and an internal curtain system.
5. Unconditioned greenhouses.
# T C

# TR TIO TH R

# OP I R IR T

# CO PO T

Skylight: 0.5

Vertical fenestration: 0.7

Buildings that comply with the following shall be exempt from the building thermal envelope provisions of this code:

1. Are separate buildings with floor area not more than 1,200 square feet (110 m²).
2. Are intended to house electric equipment with installed equipment power totaling not less than 7 watts per square foot (75 W/m²) and not intended for human occupancy.
3. Have a heating system capacity not greater than (17,000 BTU/hr) (5 kW) and a heating thermostat setpoint that is restricted to not more than 50°F (10°C).
4. Have an average wall and roof U-factor less than 0.200 in Climate Zones 1 through 5 and less than 0.120 in Climate Zones 6 through 8.
5. Comply with the roof solar reflectance and thermal emittance provisions for Climate Zone 1.

Building thermal envelope opaque assemblies shall have a U-, C- or R-factor not greater than that specified in Table C. Commercial buildings or portions of commercial buildings enclosing residential occupancies shall use the U-, C- or R-factor from the “Residential” column of Table C. Commercial buildings or portions of commercial buildings enclosing occupancies other than residential shall use the U-, C- or R-factor from the “All other” column of Table C.
# Insulation

|                          | U-0.048 | U-0.03  | U-0.03  | U-0.03  | U-0.03  | U-0.03  | U-0.032 | U-0.032 | U-0.032 | U-0.032 | U-0.032 | U-0.032 | U-0.028 | U-0.028 | U-0.028 | U-0.028 |
| ------------------------ | ------- | ------- | ------- | ------- | ------- | ------- | ------- | ------- | ------- | ------- | ------- | ------- | ------- | ------- | ------- | ------- |
| Entirely above roof deck | U-0.035 | U-0.035 | U-0.035 | U-0.035 | U-0.035 | U-0.035 | U-0.035 | U-0.035 | U-0.035 | U-0.035 | U-0.031 | U-0.02  | U-0.02  | U-0.02  | U-0.026 | U-0.026 |
| Metal buildings          | U-0.027 | U-0.027 | U-0.027 | U-0.027 | U-0.027 | U-0.027 | U-0.021 | U-0.021 | U-0.021 | U-0.021 | U-0.021 | U-0.021 | U-0.017 | U-0.017 | U-0.017 | U-0.017 |
| Attic and other          | U-0.151 | U-0.151 | U-0.151 | U-0.123 | U-0.123 | U-0.104 | U-0.104 | U-0.00  | U-0.00  | U-0.080 | U-0.080 | U-0.071 | U-0.071 | U-0.071 | U-0.037 | U-0.037 |
| Metal building           | U-0.07  | U-0.07  | U-0.07  | U-0.07  | U-0.07  | U-0.052 | U-0.052 | U-0.050 | U-0.050 | U-0.050 | U-0.050 | U-0.050 | U-0.044 | U-0.03  | U-0.03  | U-0.03  |
| Metal framed             | U-0.077 | U-0.077 | U-0.077 | U-0.064 | U-0.064 | U-0.064 | U-0.064 | U-0.064 | U-0.055 | U-0.055 | U-0.04  | U-0.04  | U-0.04  | U-0.042 | U-0.037 | U-0.037 |
| Wood framed and other    | U-0.064 | U-0.064 | U-0.064 | U-0.064 | U-0.064 | U-0.064 | U-0.064 | U-0.064 | U-0.051 | U-0.051 | U-0.051 | U-0.051 | U-0.051 | U-0.051 | U-0.032 | U-0.032 |
| Below-grade wall         | C-1.140 | C-1.140 | C-1.140 | C-1.140 | C-1.140 | C-1.140 | C-0.11  | C-0.02  | C-0.11  | C-0.02  | C-0.02  | C-0.063 | C-0.063 | C-0.063 | C-0.063 | C-0.063 |
| Mass                     | U-0.322 | U-0.322 | U-0.107 | U-0.087 | U-0.074 | U-0.074 | U-0.057 | U-0.051 | U-0.057 | U-0.051 | U-0.051 | U-0.051 | U-0.042 | U-0.042 | U-0.038 | U-0.038 |
| Joist/framing            | U-0.066 | U-0.066 | U-0.033 | U-0.033 | U-0.033 | U-0.033 | U-0.033 | U-0.033 | U-0.033 | U-0.027 | U-0.027 | U-0.027 | U-0.027 | U-0.027 | U-0.027 |         |
| Unheated slabs           | F-0.73  | F-0.73  | F-0.73  | F-0.73  | F-0.73  | F-0.54  | F-0.52  | F-0.52  | F-0.52  | F-0.51  | F-0.51  | F-0.434 | F-0.51  | F-0.434 | F-0.434 | F-0.424 |
| Heated slabs             | F-0.6   | F-0.6   | F-0.6   | F-0.6   | F-0.66  | F-0.66  | F-0.62  | F-0.62  | F-0.62  | F-0.62  | F-0.62  | F-0.602 | F-0.602 | F-0.602 | F-0.602 | F-0.602 |
| Swinging door            | U-0.31  | U-0.31  | U-0.31  | U-0.31  | U-0.31  | U-0.31  | U-0.31  | U-0.31  | U-0.31  | U-0.31  | U-0.31  | U-0.31  | U-0.31  | U-0.31  | U-0.31  | U-0.31  |
| Garage door              | U-0.31  | U-0.31  | U-0.31  | U-0.31  | U-0.31  | U-0.31  | U-0.31  | U-0.31  | U-0.31  | U-0.31  | U-0.31  | U-0.31  | U-0.31  | U-0.31  | U-0.31  |         |

For SI: 1 pound per square foot = 4.88 kg/m², 1 pound per cubic foot = 16 kg/m³.

ci Continuous Insulation, NR No Requirement, LS Liner System.

a. Where assembly -factors, C-factors and -factors are established in IHR I Appendix A, such opaque assemblies shall be a compliance alternative where those values meet the criteria of this table, and provided that the construction, excluding the cladding system on walls, complies with the appropriate construction details from IHR I Appendix A.

b. Where -factors have been established by testing in accordance with TC, such opaque assemblies shall be a compliance alternative where those values meet the criteria of this table. The -value of continuous insulation shall be permitted to be added to or subtracted from the original tested design.

c. Where heated slabs are below grade, below-grade walls shall comply with the -factor requirements for above-grade mass walls.

d. “Mass floors” shall be in accordance with C.

e. These C-, - and -factors are based on assemblies that are not required to contain insulation.

f. “Mass walls” shall be in accordance with C.

g. Swinging door -factors shall be determined in accordance with RC.

h. Garage doors having a single row of fenestration shall have an assembly -factor less than or equal to 0.44 in Climate Zones 0 through 6 and less than or equal to 0.36 in Climate Zones 7 and 8, provided that the fenestration area is not less than 14 percent and not more than 25 percent of the total door area.

C C

C C U-, C-, and F-factors for proposed building thermal envelope opaque assemblies shall be determined in accordance with pre-calculated values, testing, calculations, or modeling procedures established in ANSI/ASHRAE/IESNA 90.1 Appendix A.

The R-value of insulation products used for assembly evaluations shall comply with Section C303.1.4. The thermal resistance of building materials used for assembly evaluations shall comply with values in ANSI/ASHRAE/IESNA 90.1 Appendix A or an approved source based on approved test data. Air spaces used for assembly evaluations shall comply with Section C402.2.7.

C T

C T For tapered, above-deck roof insulation, the area-weighted U-factor of nonuniform insulation thickness shall be determined by accepted engineering practice.

The area-weighted U-factor shall be permitted to be determined by using the inverse of the average R-value determined in accordance with the exception to Section C402.1.3.2.
In determining compliance with Table C402.1.2, the U-factor of concrete masonry units with integral insulation shall be permitted to be used.

Where determining compliance with Table C402.1.2, the U-factor of concrete masonry units with integral insulation shall be permitted to be used.

# Compliance with required maximum U-factors

Compliance with required maximum U-factors for mass walls and mass floors in accordance with Table C402.1.2 shall be permitted for assemblies complying with Section C402.1.3.3.

# U-factors for building envelopes

U-factors for building envelopes containing cold-formed steel framed ceilings and walls shall be permitted to be determined in accordance with AISI S250 as modified herein.

1. Where the steel-framed wall contains no cavity insulation, and uses continuous insulation to satisfy the U-factor maximum, the steel-framed wall member spacing is permitted to be installed at any on-center spacing.
2. Where the steel-framed wall contains framing at 24 inches (610 mm) on center with a 23 percent framing factor or framing at 16 inches (400 mm) on-center with a 25 percent framing factor, the next lower framing member spacing input values shall be used when calculating using AISI S250.
3. Where the steel-framed wall contains less than 23 percent framing factors the AISI S250 shall be used without any modifications.
4. Where the steel-framed wall contains other than standard C-shape framing members the AISI S250 calculation option for other than standard C-shape framing is permitted to be used.

U-factors of opaque assemblies within fenestration framing systems shall be determined in accordance with the default values in Table C402.1.2.3, ASTM C1363, or ANSI/NFRC 100.
# Rated R-value of Insulation between Framing

| Frame Type                                        | Spandrel Panel                        | Default U-factor |       |
| ------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------- | ---------------- | ----- |
| Single glass pane, stone, or metal panel          | CTI                                   | R-4              | 0.285 |
| CTO                                               | R-7                                   | 0.25             |       |
| OR                                                | R-10                                  | 0.247            |       |
| R-15                                              | 0.236                                 |                  |       |
| R-20                                              | 0.230                                 |                  |       |
| R-25                                              | 0.226                                 |                  |       |
| R-30                                              | 0.224                                 |                  |       |
| Aluminum without Thermal Break                    | Double glazing with no low-e coatings | R-4              | 0.273 |
| R-7                                               | 0.254                                 |                  |       |
| R-10                                              | 0.244                                 |                  |       |
| R-15                                              | 0.234                                 |                  |       |
| R-20                                              | 0.22                                  |                  |       |
| R-25                                              | 0.226                                 |                  |       |
| R-30                                              | 0.223                                 |                  |       |
| Triple glazing or double glazing with low-e glass | R-4                                   | 0.263            |       |
| R-7                                               | 0.24                                  |                  |       |
| R-10                                              | 0.241                                 |                  |       |
| R-15                                              | 0.233                                 |                  |       |
| R-20                                              | 0.228                                 |                  |       |
| R-25                                              | 0.225                                 |                  |       |
| R-30                                              | 0.223                                 |                  |       |
| Single glass pane, stone, or metal panel          | R-4                                   | 0.243            |       |
| R-7                                               | 0.212                                 |                  |       |
| R-10                                              | 0.17                                  |                  |       |
| R-15                                              | 0.184                                 |                  |       |
| R-20                                              | 0.176                                 |                  |       |
| R-25                                              | 0.172                                 |                  |       |
| R-30                                              | 0.16                                  |                  |       |
| Aluminum with Thermal Break                       | Double glazing with no low-e coatings | R-4              | 0.228 |
| R-7                                               | 0.205                                 |                  |       |
| R-10                                              | 0.13                                  |                  |       |
| R-15                                              | 0.182                                 |                  |       |
| R-20                                              | 0.175                                 |                  |       |
| R-25                                              | 0.171                                 |                  |       |
| R-30                                              | 0.168                                 |                  |       |
| Triple glazing or double glazing with low-e glass | R-4                                   | 0.217            |       |
| R-7                                               | 0.1                                   |                  |       |
| R-10                                              | 0.18                                  |                  |       |
| R-15                                              | 0.180                                 |                  |       |
| R-20                                              | 0.174                                 |                  |       |
| R-25                                              | 0.170                                 |                  |       |
| R-30                                              | 0.167                                 |                  |       |
| Single glass pane, stone, or metal panel          | R-4                                   | 0.217            |       |
| R-7                                               | 0.180                                 |                  |       |
| R-10                                              | 0.161                                 |                  |       |
| R-15                                              | 0.145                                 |                  |       |
| R-20                                              | 0.136                                 |                  |       |
| R-25                                              | 0.130                                 |                  |       |
| R-30                                              | 0.126                                 |                  |       |
| Structural Glazing                                | Double glazing with no low-e coatings | R-4              | 0.1   |
| R-7                                               | 0.172                                 |                  |       |
| R-10                                              | 0.157                                 |                  |       |
| R-15                                              | 0.143                                 |                  |       |
| R-20                                              | 0.135                                 |                  |       |
| R-25                                              | 0.12                                  |                  |       |
| R-30                                              | 0.126                                 |                  |       |
| Single glass pane, stone, or metal panel          | R-4                                   | 0.160            |       |
| R-7                                               | 0.108                                 |                  |       |
| R-10                                              | 0.082                                 |                  |       |
| R-15                                              | 0.058                                 |                  |       |
| R-20                                              | 0.045                                 |                  |       |
| R-25                                              | 0.037                                 |                  |       |
| R-30                                              | 0.031                                 |                  |       |
| No framing or Insulation is Continuous            | Double glazing with no low-e coatings | R-4              | 0.147 |
| R-7                                               | 0.102                                 |                  |       |
| R-10                                              | 0.078                                 |                  |       |
| R-15                                              | 0.056                                 |                  |       |
| R-20                                              | 0.044                                 |                  |       |
| R-25                                              | 0.036                                 |                  |       |
| R-30                                              | 0.030                                 |                  |       |
| Triple glazing or double glazing with low-e glass | R-4                                   | 0.13             |       |
| R-7                                               | 0.08                                  |                  |       |
| R-10                                              | 0.076                                 |                  |       |
| R-15                                              | 0.055                                 |                  |       |
| R-20                                              | 0.043                                 |                  |       |
| R-25                                              | 0.035                                 |                  |       |
| R-30                                              | 0.030                                 |                  |       |

a. Extrapolation outside of the table shall not be permitted. Assemblies with distance between framing less than 30 inches (762 mm), or not included in the default table, shall have a U-factor determined by testing in compliance with ASTM C1363 or modeling in compliance with ANSI/NFRC 100. Spandrel panel assemblies in the table do not include metal backpans. For designs with metal backpans, multiply the U-factor by 1.20.

b. This frame type shall be used for systems that do not contain a non-metallic element that separates the metal exposed to the exterior from the metal that is exposed to the interior condition.

c. This frame type shall be used for systems where a urethane or other non-metallic element separates the metal exposed to the exterior from the metal that is exposed to the interior condition.

d. This frame type shall be used for systems that have no exposed mullion on the exterior.

e. This frame type shall be used for systems where there is no framing or the insulation is continuous and uninterrupted between framing.
Where the total area of through-wall penetrations of mechanical equipment is greater than 1 percent of the opaque above grade wall area, such area shall be calculated as a separate wall assembly with a published and approved U-factor for that equipment or a default U-factor of 0.5.

For opaque portions of the building thermal envelope using this section as an alternative to Section C402.1.2, the R-values for cavity insulation and continuous insulation shall be not less than that specified in Table C402.1.3. Commercial buildings or portions of commercial buildings enclosing residential occupancies shall use the R-values from the “Residential” column of Table C402.1. Commercial buildings or portions of commercial buildings enclosing occupancies other than residential shall use the R-values from the “All other” column of Table C402.1.
| Insulation                   | Entirely above roof deck |         |         |         |         |                   |                   |                   |                   |                   |                   |                   |                   |                   |                   |                   |                   |               |      |      |      |      |      |      |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |
| ---------------------------- | ------------------------ | ------- | ------- | ------- | ------- | ----------------- | ----------------- | ----------------- | ----------------- | ----------------- | ----------------- | ----------------- | ----------------- | ----------------- | ----------------- | ----------------- | ----------------- | ------------- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |
| R-20ci                       | R-25ci                   | R-25ci  | R-25ci  | R-25ci  | R-25ci  | R-30ci            | R-30ci            | R-30ci            | R-30ci            | R-30ci            | R-30ci            | R-35ci            | R-35ci            | R-35ci            | R-35ci            |                   |                   |               |      |      |      |      |      |      |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |
| Metal buildingsb             | R-1                      | R-1     | R-1     | R-1     | R-1     | R-1               | R-1               | R-1               | R-1               | R-1               | R-25              | R-30              | R-30              | R-30              | R-25              | R-25              |                   |               |      |      |      |      |      |      |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |
|                              | R-11                     | R-11    |         | R-11 LS | R-11 LS | R-11 LS           | R-11 LS           | R-11 LS           | R-11 LS           | R-11 LS           | R-11 LS           | R-11 LS           | R-11 LS           | R-11 LS           | R-11              | R-11              |                   |               |      |      |      |      |      |      |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |
| Attic and other assembliesf  | R-38                     | R-38    | R-38    | R-38    | R-38    | R-38              | R-4               | R-4               | R-4               | R-4               | R-4               | R-4               | R-60              | R-60              | R-60              | R-60              |                   |               |      |      |      |      |      |      |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |
| R-5.7cic                     | R-5.7ci                  | R-5.7ci | R-7.6ci | R-7.6ci | R- .5ci | R- .5ci           | R-11.4ci          | R-11.4ci          | R-13.3ci          | R-13.3ci          | R-15.2ci          | R-15.2ci          | R-15.2ci          | R-25ci            | R-25ci            |                   |                   |               |      |      |      |      |      |      |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |
| Wood framed and otherh       |                          |         |         |         |         |                   |                   |                   | R-13              | R-13              | R-13              | R-13              | R-13              | R-13              | R-13              | R-13              | R-13              | R-13          | R-13 | R-13 | R-13 | R-13 | R-13 | R-13 |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |
| R-6.5ci                      | R-6.5ci                  | R-6.5ci | R-13ci  | R-6.5ci | R-13ci  | R-13ci            | R-14ci            | R-14ci            | R-14ci            | R-14ci            | R-14ci            | R-17ci            | R-1 .5ci          | R-1 .5ci          | R-1 .5ci          |                   |                   |               |      |      |      |      |      |      |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |
| Below-grade wall assembliesd | NR                       | NR      | NR      | NR      | NR      | NR                | R-7.5ci           | R-10ci            | R-7.5ci           | R-10ci            | R-10ci            | R-15ci            | R-15ci            | R-15ci            | R-15ci            | R-15ci            |                   |               |      |      |      |      |      |      |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |
| NR                           | NR                       | R-6.3ci | R-8.3ci | R-10ci  | R-10ci  | R-14.6ci          | R-16.7ci          | R-14.6ci          | R-16.7ci          | R-16.7ci          | R-16.7ci          | R-20. ci          | R-20. ci          | R-23ci            | R-23ci            |                   |                   |               |      |      |      |      |      |      |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |
| Unheated slabs               | NR                       | NR      | NR      | NR      | NR      | R-10 for 24 below | R-15 for 24 below | R-15 for 24 below | R-15 for 24 below | R-20 for 24 below | R-20 for 24 below | R-20 for 48 below | R-20 for 48 below | R-20 for 48 below | R-25 for 48 below |                   |                   |               |      |      |      |      |      |      |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |
|                              |                          |         |         | R-7.5   | R-7.5   | R-7.5             | R-7.5             | R-10 for 24 below | R-10 for 24 below | R-15 for 24 below | R-15 for 36 below | R-15 for 36 below | R-15 for 48 below | R-15 for 48 below | R-15 for 48 below | R-15 for 48 below | R-15 for 48 below | R-5 full slab |      |      |      |      |      |      |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound per square foot = 4.88 kg/m², 1 pound per cubic foot = 16 kg/m³.

ci = Continuous Insulation, NR = No Requirement, LS = Liner System.

a. Assembly descriptions can be found in Appendix A.

b. Where using R-value compliance method, a thermal spacer block shall be provided, otherwise use the U-factor compliance method in T C.

c. R-5.7ci is allowed to be substituted with concrete block walls complying with T C, ungrouted or partially grouted not less than 32 inches or less on center vertically and not less than 48 inches on center horizontally, with ungrouted cores filled with materials having a maximum thermal conductivity of 0.44 tu-in/h-f² °F.

d. Where heated slabs are below grade, below-grade walls shall comply with the R-value requirements for above-grade mass walls.

e. “Mass floors” shall be in accordance with T C.

f. “Mass walls” shall be in accordance with T C.

g. The first value is for perimeter insulation and the second value is for full, under-slab insulation. Perimeter insulation and full-slab insulation components shall be installed in accordance with Section C402.2.4.1.

h. The first value is cavity insulation the second value is continuous insulation. Therefore, “R-0 R-12ci” means R-12 continuous insulation and no cavity insulation “R-13 R-3.8ci” means R-13 cavity insulation and R-3.8 continuous insulation “R-20” means R-20 cavity insulation and no continuous insulation. R-13, R-20, and R-27 cavity insulation as used in this table apply to a nominal 4-inch (101 mm), 6-inch (152 mm), and 8-inch (203 mm) deep wood or cold-formed steel stud cavities, respectively.
Where cavity insulation is installed in multiple layers, the cavity insulation R-values shall be summed to determine compliance with the cavity insulation R-value requirements. Where continuous insulation is installed in multiple layers, the continuous insulation R-values shall be summed to determine compliance with the continuous insulation R-value requirements. Cavity insulation R-values shall not be used to determine compliance with the continuous insulation R-value requirements in Table C402.1.3.

Area-weighted averaging shall not be permitted for R-value compliance.

For tapered above-deck roof insulation, compliance with the R-values required in Table C402.1.3 shall be permitted to be demonstrated by the average R-value determined by multiplying the rated R-value per inch of the insulation material by the average thickness of the roof insulation. The average thickness of the roof insulation shall equal the total volume of the roof insulation divided by the area of the roof.

Building materials that are not insulation components complying with Chapter 3 shall be excluded from demonstrating compliance with the R-values of Table C402.1.3. Air spaces used to demonstrate compliance with Table C402.1.3 shall comply with Section C402.2.7.

Assembly constructions used for compliance with Table C402.1.3 shall be as described in ANSI/ASHRAE/IES 90.1 Appendix A.

The R-value of integral insulation installed in concrete masonry units shall not be used in determining compliance with Table C402.1.3 except as otherwise noted.

Compliance with required minimum R-values for insulation components applied to mass walls and mass floors in accordance with Table C402.1.3 shall be permitted for assemblies complying with the following:

1. Where used as a component of the building thermal envelope, mass walls shall comply with one of the following:
1. Weigh not less than 35 pounds per square foot (171 kg/m²) of wall surface area.
2. Weigh not less than 25 pounds per square foot (122 kg/m²) of wall surface area where the material weight is not more than 120 pcf (1,000 kg/m³).
3. Have a heat capacity exceeding 7 Btu/ft²·°F (144 kJ/m²·K).
4. Have a heat capacity exceeding 5 Btu/ft²·°F (103 kJ/m²·K) where the material weight is not more than 120 pcf (1,000 kg/m³).
2. Where used as a component of the building thermal envelope of a building, the minimum weight of mass floors shall comply with one of the following:
1. 35 pounds per square foot (171 kg/m²) of floor surface area.
2. 25 pounds per square foot (122 kg/m²) of floor surface area where the material weight is not more than 120 pcf (1,000 kg/m³).

Building envelope values and fenestration areas determined in accordance with Equation 4-1 shall be an alternative to compliance with the U-, F-, psi-, chi-, and C-factors in Table C402.1.5, and the maximum allowable fenestration areas in Table C402.1.2. Fenestration shall meet the applicable SHGC requirements of Table C402.1.2.

| AP | Sum of the (area x U-factor) for each proposed building thermal envelope assembly, other than slab-on-grade or below-grade wall assemblies                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
| -- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| P  | Sum of the (length x F-factor) for each proposed slab-on-grade edge condition                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
| CP | Sum of the (area x C-factor) for each proposed below-grade wall assembly                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| TP | Sum of the (LP) and (NP) values for each type of thermal bridge condition of the building thermal envelope as identified in Section C402.6 in the proposed building. For the purposes of this section, the (LP) and (NP) values for thermal bridges caused by materials with a thermal conductivity less than or equal to 3.0 Btu-in/h-ft²-°F shall be assigned as zero. For buildings or structures located in Climate Zones 0 through 3, the value of TP shall be assigned as zero.                                        |
| LP | psi-factor length of the thermal bridge elements in the proposed building thermal envelope.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| NP | chi-factor x number of the thermal bridge point elements other than fasteners, ties, or brackets in the proposed building thermal envelope.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| AT | Sum of the (area x U-factor permitted by Tables C402.1.2 and C402.5) for each proposed building thermal envelope assembly, other than slab-on-grade or below-grade wall assemblies                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
| T  | Sum of the (length x F-factor permitted by Table C402.1.2 for each proposed slab-on-grade edge condition                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| CT | Sum of the (area x C-factor permitted by Table C402.1.2) for each proposed below-grade wall assembly                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| TT | Sum of the (LT) and (NT) values for each type of thermal bridge condition in the proposed building thermal envelope as identified in Section C402.6 with values specified as “compliant” in Table C402.1.4. For the purposes of this section, the (LT) and (NT) values for thermal bridges caused by materials with a thermal conductivity less than or equal to 3.0 Btu-in/h-ft²-°F shall be assigned as zero. For buildings or structures located in Climate Zones 0 through 3, the value of TT shall be assigned as zero. |
| LT | (psi-factor specified as “compliant” in Table C402.1.5) length of the thermal bridge elements in the proposed building thermal envelope.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| NT | (chi-factor specified as “compliant” in Table C402.1.5) x number of the thermal bridge point elements other than fasteners, ties, or brackets in the proposed building thermal envelope.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |

# Maximum vertical fenestration area allowable by Section C402.5.1, C402.5.1.1, or C402.5.1.2

| PF | Proposed vertical fenestration area                                                               |                                                            |
| -- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------- |
| RF | PF, but not less than zero (excess vertical fenestration area)                                    |                                                            |
| SF | Area-weighted average U-factor permitted by Table C402.5 of all vertical fenestration assemblies  |                                                            |
| TF | Area-weighted average U-factor permitted by Table C402.1.2 of all exterior opaque wall assemblies |                                                            |
| UF | SF                                                                                                | TF (excess U-factor for excess vertical fenestration area) |
| VF | RF x UF (excess UxA due to excess vertical fenestration area)                                     |                                                            |

# Maximum skylight area allowable by Section C402.1.2

| PS | Actual skylight area                                                                     |                                                   |
| -- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------- |
| RS | S                                                                                        | PS, but not less than zero (excess skylight area) |
| SS | Area-weighted average U-factor permitted by Table C402.5 of all skylights                |                                                   |
| TS | Area-weighted average U-factor permitted by Table C402.1.2 of all opaque roof assemblies |                                                   |
| US | SS                                                                                       | TS (excess U-factor for excess skylight area)     |
| VS | RS x US (excess UxA due to excess skylight area)                                         |                                                   |

# Proposed psi- or chi-factor for each thermal bridge

1. Where the proposed mitigation of a thermal bridge is compliant with the requirements of Section C402.6, the “compliant” values in Table C402.1.4 shall be used for the proposed psi- or chi-factors.
2. Where a thermal bridge is not mitigated in a manner at least equivalent to Section C402.6, the “non-compliant” values in Table C402.1.4 shall be used for the proposed psi- or chi-factors.
3. Where the proposed mitigation of a thermal bridge provides a psi- or chi-factor less than the “compliant” values in Table C402.1.4, the proposed psi- or chi-factor shall be determined by thermal analysis, testing, or other approved sources.

Staff note: existing items removed
# Thermal ridge per Thermal ridge

# Section C402.6

| psi-factor (tu/h-ft-°F)              | chi-factor                   | psi-factor (tu/h-ft-°F) | chi-factor |                  |     |   |   |   |
| ------------------------------------ | ---------------------------- | ----------------------- | ---------- | ---------------- | --- | - | - | - |
| C402.6.1                             | Balconies, slabs, and decks  | 0.2                     | n/a        | 0.5              | n/a |   |   |   |
| C402.6.2                             | Cladding supports            | 0.2                     | n/a        | 0.3              | n/a |   |   |   |
| C402.6.3                             | Structural beams and columns | 1.0-carbon steel        | n/a        | 2.0-carbon steel | n/a |   |   |   |
|                                      |                              | 0.3-concrete            |            | 1.0-concrete     |     |   |   |   |
| C402.6.4                             | Vertical fenestration        | 0.15                    | n/a        | 0.3              | n/a |   |   |   |
| C402.6.5                             | Parapets                     | 0.2                     | n/a        | 0.4              | n/a |   |   |   |
| For SI: W/m² = 0.578 tu/h-ft-°F 1 W/ |                              |                         |            |                  |     |   |   |   |
| 1.0 tu/h-°F                          |                              |                         |            |                  |     |   |   |   |

In Climate zones 3 through 8, where combustion air is supplied through openings in an exterior wall to a room or space containing a space-conditioning fuel-burning appliance, one of the following shall apply:

1. The room or space containing the appliance shall be located outside of the building thermal envelope.
2. The room or space containing the appliance shall be enclosed and isolated from conditioned spaces inside the building thermal envelope. Such rooms shall comply with all of the following:
1. The walls, floors and ceilings that separate the enclosed room or space from conditioned spaces shall be insulated to be not less than equivalent to the insulation requirement of below-grade walls as specified in T C or T C.
2. The walls, floors and ceilings that separate the enclosed room or space from conditioned spaces shall be sealed in accordance with C.
3. The doors into the enclosed room or space shall be fully gasketed.
4. Piping serving as part of a heating or cooling system and ducts in the enclosed room or space shall be insulated in accordance with C. Service water piping shall be insulated in accordance with Section C404.
5. Where an air duct supplying combustion air to the enclosed room or space passes through conditioned space, the duct shall be insulated to an R-value of not less than R-8.

Fireplaces and stoves complying with Sections 01 through 05 of the
# International Building Code

# Insulation in Building Materials

Opaque assemblies shall be installed in accordance with Section C303.2 and C through C or an approved design.

# Roof Insulation

Roof insulation materials shall be installed between the roof framing, continuously above the ceiling framing, continuously on or within the roof assembly or in any approved combination thereof.

Continuous, above deck insulation board located above the roof deck shall be installed in not less than two layers and the edge joints between each layer of insulation shall be staggered, except where insulation tapers to the roof deck at a gutter edge, roof drain or scupper.

Skylight curbs shall be insulated to the level of the above-deck roof insulation or R-5, whichever is less. Unit skylight curbs included as a component of a skylight listed and labeled in accordance with RC shall not be required to be insulated.

# Above-Grade Wall Insulation

Above-grade wall insulation materials shall be installed between the wall framing, be integral to the wall assembly, be continuous on the wall assembly, or be any combination of these insulation methods. Where continuous insulation is layered on the exterior side of a wall assembly, the joints shall be staggered.

# Floor Insulation

Floor insulation shall be installed between floor framing, be integral to the floor assembly, be continuous on the floor assembly, or be any combination of these insulation methods. Where continuous insulation is layered on the exterior side of a floor assembly, the joints shall be staggered. Floor framing cavity insulation or structural slab insulation shall be installed to maintain permanent contact with the underside of the subfloor decking or structural slabs.

1. The floor framing cavity insulation or structural slab insulation shall be permitted to be installed in contact with the top side of sheathing or continuous insulation installed on the bottom side of floor assemblies. Floor framing or structural slab members at the
The perimeter of the floor assembly shall be insulated vertically for their full depth with insulation equivalent to that required for the above grade wall construction.

2. Insulation applied to the underside of concrete floor slabs shall be permitted an airspace of not more than 1 inch (25 mm) where it turns up and is in contact with the underside of the floor under walls associated with the building thermal envelope.

Where installed, the perimeter insulation for slab-on-grade shall be placed on the outside of the foundation or on the inside of the foundation wall. For installations complying with Table C402.1.3, the perimeter insulation shall extend downward from the top of the slab for the minimum distance shown in the table or to the top of the footing, whichever is less, or downward to not less than the bottom of the slab and then horizontally to the interior or exterior for the total distance shown in the table. Where installed, full slab insulation shall be continuous under the entire area of the slab-on-grade floor, except at structural column locations and service penetrations. Insulation required at the heated slab perimeter shall not be required to extend below the bottom of the heated slab and shall be continuous with the full slab insulation.

Where the slab-on-grade floor is greater than 24 inches (61 mm) below the finished exterior grade, perimeter insulation is not required.

Below-grade wall insulation shall be installed between framing members, be integral to the wall assembly, be continuous on the wall assembly, or be any combination of these insulation methods. For installations complying with Section C401.2.1, insulation shall extend to a depth of not less than 10 feet (3048 mm) below the outside finished ground level, or to the level of the lowest floor of the conditioned space enclosed by the below-grade wall, whichever is less.

Radiant heating system panels, and their associated components that are installed in interior or exterior assemblies, shall be insulated to an R-value of not less than R 3.5 on all surfaces not facing the space being heated. Radiant heating system panels that are installed in the building thermal envelope shall be separated from the exterior of the building or unconditioned or exempt spaces by not less than the R-value of insulation installed in the opaque assembly in which they are installed or the assembly shall comply with C.

Heated slabs on grade insulated in accordance with C and Section C402.1.

Where the R-value of an airspace is used for compliance in accordance with C, the airspace shall be enclosed in an unventilated cavity bounded on all sides by building components and constructed to minimize airflow into and out of the enclosed airspace. Airflow shall be deemed minimized where one of the following conditions occur:
# 1. The enclosed airspace is unventilated.

# 2. The enclosed airspace is bounded on at least one side by an anchored masonry veneer, constructed in accordance with Chapter 14 of the International Building Code, and vented by veneer weep holes located only at the bottom of the airspace and space not less than 15 inches (381 mm) on center with top of the cavity airspace closed.

For ventilated cavities, the effect of the ventilation of airspaces located on the exterior side of the continuous air barrier and adjacent to and behind the exterior wall-covering material shall be determined in accordance with T C modified with an airflow entering the bottom and exiting the top of the airspace at an air movement rate of not less than 70 mm/second.

# C G R

For Climate Zone 0, above-grade east-oriented, south-oriented, and west-oriented walls shall comply with either of the following:

1. Not less than 75 percent of the above-grade wall area shall have an area-weighted initial solar reflectance of not less than 0.30 where tested in accordance with ASTM C154 with A 1.5GV output or ASTM E 03 with A 1.5GV output, or determined in accordance with an approved source. This above-grade wall area shall have an emittance or emissivity of not less than 0.75 where tested in accordance with ASTM C835, C1371, E408, or determined in accordance with an approved source. For the portion of the above-grade wall that is glass spandrel area, a solar reflectance of not less than 0.2, as determined in accordance with NFRC 300 or ISO  050, shall be permitted. Area-weighted averaging is permitted only using south-, east-, and west-oriented walls enclosing the same occupancy classification.
2. Not less than 30 percent of the above-grade wall area shall be shaded by manmade structures, existing buildings, hillsides, permanent building projections, on-site renewable energy systems, or a combination of these. Shade coverage shall be calculated by projecting the shading surface downward on the above-grade wall at an angle of 45 degrees.

# C R

Low-sloped roofs directly above cooled conditioned spaces in Climate Zones 0 through 3 shall comply with one or more of the options in T C.

# The following roofs and portions of roofs are exempt from the requirements of T C:

1. Portions of the roof that include or are covered by the following:
# 2.

Portions of the roof shaded during the peak sun angle on the summer solstice by permanent features of the building or by permanent features of adjacent buildings.

# 3.

Portions of roofs that are ballasted with a minimum stone ballast of 17 pounds per square foot (74 kg/m²) or 23 psf (117 kg/m²) pavers.

# 4.

Roofs where not less than 75 percent of the roof area complies with one or more of the exceptions to this section.
# OPTIO

Three-year-aged solar reflectanceᵇ of 0.55 and 3-year aged thermal emittanceᶜ of 0.75

Three-year-aged solar reflectance indexᵈ of 64

a. The use of area-weighted averages to comply with these requirements shall be permitted. Materials lacking 3-year-aged tested values for either solar reflectance or thermal emittance shall be assigned both a 3-year-aged solar reflectance in accordance with C and a 3-year-aged thermal emittance of 0.0.

b. Aged solar reflectance tested in accordance with T C, T or T or CRRC.

c. Aged thermal emittance tested in accordance with T C or T or CRRC.

d. Solar reflectance index (SRI) shall be determined in accordance with T using a convection coefficient of 2.1 tu/h ft² F (12 W/m²). Calculation of aged SRI shall be based on aged tested values of solar reflectance and thermal emittance.

Where an aged solar reflectance required by C is not available, it shall be determined in accordance with Equation 4-2.

where:

- aged: The aged solar reflectance.
- initial: The initial solar reflectance determined in accordance with CRRC.

Fenestration shall comply with C through C and T C. Daylight responsive controls shall comply with this section and C.
|                | Fixed | Operable | Fixed | Operable | Fixed | Operable | Fixed | Operable |
| -------------- | ----- | -------- | ----- | -------- | ----- | -------- | ----- | -------- |
| HGC            | 0.50  | 0.62     | 0.83  |          | 0.36  | 0.45     | 0.63  |          |
| fenestration   | 0.45  | 0.60     | 0.77  |          | 0.34  | 0.42     | 0.63  |          |
| Entrance doors | 0.42  | 0.54     | 0.68  |          | 0.2   | 0.36     | 0.63  |          |
|                | 0.2   | 0.23     | 0.21  | 0.25     | 0.23  | 0.25     | 0.23  | 0.36     |
| PF             | 0.28  | 0.25     | 0.30  | 0.28     | 0.30  | 0.28     | 0.43  |          |
| 0.5            | 0.37  | 0.34     | 0.40  | 0.37     | 0.40  | 0.37     | 0.58  |          |
| -factor        | 0.70  | 0.65     | 0.55  | 0.50     | 0.50  | 0.50     | 0.44  | 0.41     |
| SHGC           | 0.30  | 0.30     | 0.30  | 0.40     | 0.40  | 0.40     | NR    | NR       |

NR: No Requirement, PF: Protection Factor.

The vertical fenestration area, not including opaque doors and opaque spandrel panels, shall be not greater than 30 percent of the gross above-grade wall area. The skylight area shall be not greater than 3 percent of the gross roof area.

In Climate Zones 0 through 6, not more than 40 percent of the gross above-grade wall area shall be vertical fenestration, provided that all of the following requirements are met:

1. In buildings not greater than two stories above grade, not less than 50 percent of the net floor area is within a primary sidelit daylight zone or a toplit daylight zone.
2. In buildings three or more stories above grade, not less than 25 percent of the net floor area is within a primary sidelit daylight zone or a toplit daylight zone.
3. Daylight responsive controls are installed in daylight zones.
4. Visible transmittance (VT) of vertical fenestration is not less than 1.1 times solar heat gain coefficient (SHGC). Fenestration that is outside the scope of the code is not required to comply with Item 4.

The skylight area shall be not more than 6 percent of the roof area provided that daylight responsive controls are installed in toplit daylight zones.

Skylights shall be provided in enclosed spaces greater than 2,500 square feet (232 m²) in floor area, directly under a roof with not less than 75 percent of the ceiling area with a ceiling height greater than 15 feet (4572 mm), and used as an office, lobby, atrium, concourse, corridor, storage space, gymnasium/exercise center, convention center, automotive service area, space where manufacturing occurs, non-refrigerated warehouse, retail store, distribution/sorting area, transportation depot or workshop. The total toplit daylight zone shall be not less than half the floor area and shall comply with one of the following:

1. A minimum skylight area to toplit daylight zone of not less than 3 percent where all skylights have a VT of not less than 0.40, or VT annual of not less than 0.26, as determined in accordance with the code.
2. A minimum skylight effective aperture, determined in accordance with Evaluation 4-3, of:
1. Not less than 1 percent using a skylight's VT rating or
2. Not less than 0.66 percent using a Tubular Daylight Device's VT annual rating.

where:

- Skylight area: Total fenestration area of skylights.
- Skylight VT: Area weighted average visible transmittance of skylights.
- WF: Area weighted average well factor, where well factor is 0.0 if light well depth is less than 2 feet (610 mm), or 0.7 if light well depth is 2 feet (610 mm) or greater, or 1.0 for Tubular Daylighting Devices with VT annual ratings.
# Light well depth

Measure vertically from the underside of the lowest point of the skylight glazing to the ceiling plane under the skylight.

Skylights above daylight zones of enclosed spaces are not required in:

1. Buildings in Climate Zones 6 through 8.
2. Spaces where the designed general lighting power densities are less than 0.5 W/ft² (5.4 W/m²).
3. Areas where it is documented that existing structures or natural objects block direct beam sunlight on not less than half of the roof over the enclosed area for more than 1,500 daytime hours per year between 8 a.m. and 4 p.m.
4. Spaces where the daylight zone under rooftop monitors is greater than 50 percent of the enclosed space floor area.
5. Spaces where the total area minus the area of sidelit daylight zones is less than 2,500 square feet (232 m²), and where the lighting is controlled in accordance with C.
6. Spaces designed as storm shelters complying with ICC.

Daylight responsive controls shall be provided in toplit daylight zones.

Skylights in office, storage, automotive service, manufacturing, non-refrigerated warehouse, retail store and distribution/sorting area spaces shall have a glazing material or diffuser with a haze factor greater than 0 percent when tested in accordance with T.

Skylights and tubular daylighting devices designed and installed to exclude direct sunlight entering the occupied space by the use of fixed or automated baffles, the geometry of skylight and light well or the use of optical diffuser components.

The maximum U-factor and solar heat gain coefficient (SHGC) for fenestration shall be as specified in T.

The window projection factor shall be determined in accordance with Equation 4-4.

Where:

- Projection factor (decimal).
- Distance measured horizontally from the farthest continuous extremity of any overhang, eave or permanently attached shading device to the vertical surface of the glazing.
- Distance measured vertically from the bottom of the glazing to the underside of the overhang, eave or permanently attached shading device.
- Where different windows or glass doors have different U-values, they shall each be evaluated separately.

In Climate Zones 0 through 6, skylights shall be permitted a maximum SHGC of 0.60 where located above daylight zones provided with daylight responsive controls.

Where skylights are installed above daylight zones provided with daylight responsive controls, a maximum U-factor of 0.65 shall be permitted in Climate Zones 0 through 3 and a maximum U-factor of 0.75 shall be permitted in Climate Zones 4 through 8.

Where dynamic glazing is intended to satisfy the SHGC and VT requirements of T, the ratio of the higher to lower labeled SHGC shall be greater than or equal to 2.4, and the dynamic glazing shall be automatically controlled to modulate the amount of solar gain into the space in multiple steps. Dynamic glazing shall be considered separately from other fenestration, and area-weighted averaging with other fenestration that is not dynamic glazing shall not be permitted.

Dynamic glazing is not required to comply with this section where both the lower and higher labeled SHGC already comply with the requirements of T.

An area-weighted average shall be permitted to satisfy the U-factor requirements for each fenestration product category listed in T. Individual fenestration products from different fenestration product categories listed in T shall not be combined in calculating area-weighted average U-factor.

Daylight zones referenced in C through C shall comply with C and C, as applicable. Daylight zones shall include toplit daylight zones and sidelit daylight zones.
# Opaque Doors

Opaque swinging doors shall comply with T C. Opaque nonswinging doors shall comply with T C.

Opaque doors shall be considered as part of the gross area of above-grade walls that are part of the building thermal envelope. Opaque doors shall comply with C or C. Other doors shall comply with the provisions of Section C402.4.3 for vertical fenestration.

Opaque swinging doors shall comply with T C.

Opaque nonswinging doors that are horizontally hinged sectional doors with a single row of fenestration shall have an assembly factor less than or equal to 0.440 in Climate Zones 0 through 6 and less than or equal to 0.360 in Climate Zones 7 and 8, provided that the fenestration area is not less than 14 percent and not more than 25 percent of the total door area. Other doors shall comply with the provisions of C for vertical fenestration.

# Building Thermal Envelope

The building thermal envelope shall comply with C through C402.6.8.1.

A continuous air barrier shall be provided throughout the building thermal envelope. The air barrier is permitted to be any combination of inside, outside, or within the building thermal envelope. The air barrier shall comply with Sections C402.6.1.2, and C402.6.1.3. The air leakage performance of the air barrier shall be verified in accordance with Section C402.6.2. Air barriers are not required in buildings located in Climate Zone 2.

# Design Documentation

Design of the continuous air barrier shall be documented in the following manner:

1. Components comprising the continuous air barrier and their position within each building thermal envelope assembly shall be identified.
2. Joints, interconnections, and penetrations of the continuous air barrier components shall be detailed.
3. The continuity of the air barrier building element assemblies that enclose conditioned space or provide a boundary between conditioned space and unconditioned space shall be identified.
4. Documentation of the continuous air barrier shall detail methods of sealing the air barrier such as wrapping, caulking, gasketing, taping or other approved methods at the following locations:
1. Joints around fenestration and door frames.
2. Joints between walls and floors, between walls at building corners, between walls and roofs including parapets and copings, where above-grade walls meet foundations, and similar intersections.
3. Penetrations or attachments through the continuous air barrier in building envelope roofs, walls, and floors.
4. Building assemblies used as ducts or plenums.
5. Changes in continuous air barrier materials and assemblies.
5. Identify where testing will or will not be performed in accordance with Section C402.5.2. Where testing will not be performed, a plan for field inspections required by C402.5.2.3 shall be provided that includes the following:
1. Schedule for periodic inspection,
2. Continuous air barrier scope of work,
3. List of critical inspection items,
4. Inspection documentation requirements, and
5. Provisions for corrective actions where needed.

# Continuous Air Barrier Compliance

The continuous air barrier shall be constructed to comply with the following:

1. The air barrier shall be continuous for all assemblies that comprise the building thermal envelope and across the joints and assemblies.
2. Air barrier joints and seams shall be sealed, including sealing transitions in places and changes in materials. The joints and seals shall...
be securely installed in or on the  oint for its entire length so as not to dislodge, loosen or otherwise impair its ability to resist positive and negative pressure differentials such as those from design wind loads, stack effect and mechanical ventilation.

# 3.

Penetrations of the air barrier shall be caulked, gasketed or otherwise sealed in a manner compatible with the construction materials and location. Sealing shall allow for expansion, contraction and mechanical vibration. Sealing materials shall be securely installed around the penetration so as not to dislodge, loosen or otherwise impair the pnetrations ability to resist positive and negative pressure. Sealing of concealed fire sprinklers, where required, shall be in a manner that is recommended by the fire sprinkler manufacturer. Caulking or other adhesive sealants shall not be used to fill voids between fire sprinkler cover plates and walls or ceilings.

# 4.

Recessed lighting fixtures shall comply with C. Where similar objects are installed that penetrate the air barrier, provisions shall be made to maintain the integrity of the air barrier.

# 5.

Electrical and communication boxes shall comply with C402.6.1.2.2 to maintain the integrity of the air barrier.

# 6.

Electrical and communication boxes shall comply with C402.6.1.2.2. Where similar objects are installed that penetrate the air barrier, provisions shall be made to maintain the integrity of the air barrier.

C R T C C CPI

C R T C C CPI Recessed luminaires installed in the building thermal envelope shall be all of the following:

1. IC-rated.
2. Labeled as having an air leakage rate of not greater than 2.0 cfm (0.44 L/s) where tested in accordance with T at a 1.57 psf (75 Pa) pressure differential.
3. Sealed with a gasket or caulk between the housing and interior wall or ceiling covering.

C C Electrical and communication boxes that penetrate the air barrier of the building thermal envelope, and that do not comply with C402.6.1.2.2.1, shall be caulked, taped, gasketed, or otherwise sealed to the air barrier element being penetrated. All openings on the concealed portion of the box shall be sealed. Where present, insulation shall rest against all concealed portions of the box.

C C Where air-sealed boxes are installed, they shall be marked in accordance with NE A OS 4. Air sealed boxes shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

C C Air leakage of the building thermal envelope shall be tested by an approved third party in accordance with C402.6.2.1. The measured air leakage shall not be greater than 0.35 cfm/ft (1.8 L/s x m) of the building thermal envelope area at a pressure differential of 0.3 inch water gauge (75 Pa) with the calculated building thermal envelope surface area being the sum of the above- and below-grade building thermal envelope.

Add optional paragraph text here

1. Where the measured air leakage rate is greater than 0.35 cfm/ft² (1.8 L/s x m²) but is not greater than 0.45 cfm/ft² (2.3 L/s x m²), the approved third party shall perform a diagnostic evaluation using smoke tracer or infrared imaging. The evaluation shall be conducted while the building is pressurized along with a visual inspection of the air barrier in accordance with AST E1186. All identified leaks shall be sealed where such sealing can be made without damaging existing building components. A report specifying the corrective actions taken to seal leaks shall be deemed to establish compliance with the requirements of this section where submitted to the code official and the building owner. Where the measured air leakage rate is greater than 0.45 cfm/ft² (2.3 L/s x m²), corrective actions must be made to the building and an additional test completed for which the results are 0.45 cfm/ft² (2.3 L/s x m²), or less.
2. Buildings in Climate zone 2.
3. Buildings larger than 25,000 square feet (2300 m²) floor area in Climate zones 0 through 4, other than Group R and I occupancies, that comply with C402.6.2.3.
4. As an alternative, buildings or portions of building, containing Group R and I occupancies, shall be permitted to be tested by an approved third party in accordance with C402.6.2.2. The reported air leakage of the building thermal envelope shall not be greater than 0.27 cfm/ft² (1.4 L/s x m²) of the testing unit enclosure area at a pressure differential of 0.2 inch water gauge (50 Pa).

C R

C R Reserved.

C C The building thermal envelope shall be tested by an approved third party for air leakage in accordance with AST E3158 or an equivalent approved method. A report that includes the tested surface area, floor area, air by volume, stories above grade, and leakage rates shall be submitted to the code official and the building owner.

Add optional paragraph text here

1. For buildings less than 10,000 ft² (1000 m²) the entire building thermal envelope shall be permitted to be tested in accordance with AST E77, AST E3158, or AST E1827 or an equivalent approved method.
2. For buildings greater than 50,000 ft² (4645 m²), portions of the building shall be permitted to be tested and the measured air leakage shall be area-weighted by the surface areas of the building thermal envelope in each portion. The weighted average tested air leakage shall not be greater than the whole building leakage limit. The following portions of the building shall be tested:
1. The entire building thermal envelope area of stories that have any conditioned spaces directly under a roof.
# 2.2

The entire building thermal envelope area of stories that have a building entrance, a floor over unconditioned space, a loading dock, or that are below grade.

# 2.3

Representative above-grade portions of the building totaling not less than 25 percent of the wall area enclosing the remaining conditioned space.

The building thermal envelope shall be tested for air leakage in accordance with T, ANSI/RESNET/ICC 380, T or an equivalent approved method. Testing shall be conducted by an approved third party. Where multiple dwelling units or sleeping units or other spaces are contained within one building thermal envelope, each shall be considered an individual testing unit, and the building air leakage shall be the weighted average of all tested unit results, weighted by each testing unit's enclosure area. Units shall be tested without simultaneously testing adjacent units and shall be separately tested as follows:

1. Where buildings have less than eight total dwelling or sleeping units, each unit shall be tested.
2. Where buildings have eight or more dwelling or sleeping units, the greater of seven units or 20 percent of the units in the building shall be tested, including a top floor unit, a middle floor unit, a ground floor unit and a unit with the largest testing unit enclosure area. For each tested unit that exceeds the maximum air leakage rate, an additional three units shall be tested, including a mixture of testing unit types and locations.
3. Enclosed spaces with not less than one exterior wall in the building thermal envelope shall be tested in accordance with Section C402.6.2.1.

Corridors, stairwells, and enclosed spaces having a conditioned floor area not greater than 1,500 ft2 (13 m2) shall be permitted to comply with Section C402.6.2.3 and either Section C402.6.2.3.1 or Section C402.6.2.3.2.

Where Section C402.6.2.1 and C402.6.2.2 are not applicable the installation of the continuous air barrier shall be verified by the code official, a registered design professional or an approved agency in accordance with the following:

1. A review of the construction documents and other supporting data shall be conducted to assess compliance with the requirements in C.
2. Inspection of continuous air barrier components and assemblies shall be conducted during construction to verify compliance with the requirements of C402.6.2.3.1 or C502.6.2.3.2. The air barrier shall remain accessible for inspection and repair.
3. A final inspection report shall be provided for inspections completed by the registered design professional or an approved agency. The inspection report shall be provided to the building owner or owner's authorized agent and the code official. The report shall identify deficiencies found during inspection and details of corrective measures taken.

Materials with an air permeability not greater than 0.004 cfm/ft2 (0.02 L/s m2) under a pressure differential of 0.3 inch water gauge (75 Pa) when tested in accordance with T shall comply with this section. Materials in Items 1 through 16 below shall be deemed to comply with this section, provided that joints are sealed and materials are installed as air barriers in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.

1. Plywood with a thickness of not less than 3/₈ inch (10 mm).
2. Oriented strand board having a thickness of not less than 3/₈ inch (10 mm).
3. Extruded polystyrene insulation board having a thickness of not less than 1/₂ inch (12.7 mm).
4. Foil-back polyisocyanurate insulation board having a thickness of not less than 1/₂ inch (12.7 mm).
5. Closed-cell spray foam having a minimum density of 1.5 pcf (2.4 kg/m3) and having a thickness of not less than 1¹/₂ inches (38 mm).
6. Open-cell spray foam with a density between 0.4 and 1.5 pcf (0.6 and 2.4 kg/m3) and having a thickness of not less than 4.5 inches (113 mm).
7. Exterior or interior gypsum board having a thickness of not less than 1/₂ inch (12.7 mm).
8. Cement board having a thickness of not less than 1/₂ inch (12.7 mm).
9. Built-up roofing membrane.
10. Modified bituminous roof membrane.
11. Single-ply roof membrane.
12. A Portland cement/sand parge, or gypsum plaster having a thickness of not less than 5/₈ inch (15 mm).
13. Cast-in-place and precast concrete.
14. Fully grouted concrete block masonry.
15. Sheet steel or aluminum.
16. Solid or hollow masonry constructed of clay or shale masonry units.

Assemblies of materials and components with an average air leakage not greater than 0.04 cfm/ft2 (0.2 L/s m2) under a pressure differential of 0.3 inch of water gauge (75 Pa) where tested in accordance with T, T, T or T shall comply with this section. Assemblies listed in Items 1 through 3 below shall be deemed to comply, provided that joints are sealed and the requirements of C are met.

1. Concrete masonry walls coated with either one application of block filler or two applications of a paint or sealer coating.
2. Masonry walls constructed of clay or shale masonry units with a nominal width greater than or equal to 4 inches (102 mm).
3. A Portland cement/sand parge, stucco or plaster not less than 1/₂ inch (12.7 mm) in thickness.
The air leakage of fenestration and opaque doors assemblies shall comply with testing. Testing shall be conducted by an accredited, independent testing laboratory in accordance with applicable reference test standards in Table C402.6.3 and labeled by the manufacturer.

1. Field-fabricated fenestration assemblies that are sealed in accordance with C.
2. Fenestration in buildings that are tested in accordance with Section C402.6.2 are not required to meet the air leakage requirements in T C.
# Table of Thermal Resistance

| Type                                                          | Thermal Resistance (R-value) |
| ------------------------------------------------------------- | ---------------------------- |
| Windows                                                       | 0.20ᵃ                        |
| Sliding doors                                                 | 0.20ᵃ                        |
| Swinging doors                                                | 0.20ᵃ                        |
| Skylights with condensation weepage openings                  | 0.30                         |
| Skylights all other                                           | 0.20ᵃ                        |
| Curtain walls                                                 | 0.06                         |
| Storefront glazing                                            | 0.06                         |
| Commercial glazed swinging entrance doors                     | 1.00                         |
| Power-operated sliding doors and power operated folding doors | 1.00                         |
| Revolving doors                                               | 1.00                         |
| Garage doors                                                  | 0.40                         |
| Rolling doors                                                 | 1.00                         |
| High-speed doors                                              | 1.30                         |

For SI: 1 cubic foot per minute = 0.47 L/s, 1 square foot = 0.03 m².

a. The maximum rate for windows, sliding and swinging doors, and skylights is permitted to be 0.3 cfm per square foot of fenestration or door area when tested in accordance with CI at 6.24 psf (300 Pa).

Doors and access openings from conditioned space to shafts, chutes, stairways and elevator lobbies not within the scope of the fenestration assemblies covered by CI shall be gasketed, weather-stripped or sealed.

1. Door openings required to comply with Section 716 of the International Building Code.
2. Doors and door openings required by the International Building Code to comply with UL 1784.

Stairway enclosures,
Elevator shaft vents and other outdoor air intakes and exhaust openings integral to the building envelope shall be provided with dampers in accordance with C.

Building entrances shall be protected with an enclosed vestibule. Doors opening into and out of the vestibule equipped with self-closing devices. Vestibules shall be designed so that in passing through the vestibule it is not necessary for the interior and exterior doors to open at the same time. The installation of one or more revolving doors in the building entrance shall not eliminate the requirement that a vestibule be provided on any doors adjacent to revolving doors.

Vestibules are not required for the following:

1. Buildings in Climate Zones 0 through 2.
2. Doors not intended to be used by the public, such as doors to mechanical or electrical equipment rooms, or intended solely for employee use.
3. Doors opening directly from a sleeping unit or dwelling unit.
4. Doors that open directly from a space less than 3,000 square feet (278 m²) in area.
5. Revolving doors.
6. Doors used primarily to facilitate vehicular movement or material handling and adjacent personnel doors.
7. Doors that have an air curtain unit with a velocity of not less than 6.56 feet per second (2 m/s) at 6.0 inches (15 cm) above the floor that has been tested in accordance with I C or ISO 27327-1 and installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. Manual or automatic controls shall be provided that will operate the air curtain unit with the opening and closing of the door and comply with Section C403.4.1.4. Air curtain units and their controls shall comply with C.

Cargo door openings and loading door openings shall be equipped with weather seals that restrict air leakage and provide direct contact along the top and sides of vehicles that are parked in the doorway.

Thermal bridges in above-grade walls shall comply with the section or an approved design.

1. Buildings and structures located in Climate Zones 0 through 3.
2. Any thermal bridge with a material thermal conductivity not greater than 3.0 Btu/h-ft-°F.
3. Blocking, coping, flashing, and other similar materials for attachment of roof coverings.
4. Thermal bridges accounted for in the U-factor or C-factor for a building thermal envelope.

Balconies and concrete floor decks shall not penetrate the building thermal envelope. Such assemblies shall be separately supported or shall be.
supported by structural attachments or elements that minimize thermal bridging through the building thermal envelope.

Balconies and concrete floor decks shall be permitted to penetrate the building thermal envelope where:

1. an area-weighted U-factor is used for above grade wall compliance which includes a U-factor of 0.8 Btu/h·F·ft² for the area of the above grade wall penetrated by the concrete floor deck, or
2. an approved thermal break device of not less than R-10 is installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.

Linear elements supporting opaque cladding shall be off-set from the structure with attachments that allow the continuous insulation, where present, to pass behind the cladding support element.

1. An approved design where the above-grade wall U-factor used for compliance accounts for the cladding support element thermal bridge.
2. Anchoring for curtain wall and window wall systems.

Structural steel and concrete beams and columns that project through the building thermal envelope shall be covered with not less than R-5 insulation for not less than 2 feet (610 mm) beyond the interior or exterior surface of an insulation component within the building thermal envelope.

1. Where an approved thermal break device is installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.
2. An approved design where the above-grade wall U-factor used to demonstrate compliance accounts for the beam or column thermal bridge.

Vertical fenestration intersections with above grade walls shall comply with one or more of the following:

1. Where above-grade walls include continuous insulation, the plane of the exterior glazing layer or, for metal frame fenestration, a non-metal thermal break in the frame shall be positioned within 2 inches (610 mm) of the interior or exterior surface of the continuous insulation.
2. An approved design where the above-grade wall U-factor used to demonstrate compliance accounts for the beam or column thermal bridge.
3. The surface of the rough opening, not covered by the fenestration frame, shall be insulated with insulation of not less than R-3 material or covered with a wood buck that is not less than 1.5 inches (457 mm) thick.
# 4. For the intersection between vertical fenestration and opaque spandrel in a shared framing system, manufacturer's data for the spandrel-factor shall account for thermal ridges.

1. Where an approved design for the above-grade wall-factor used for compliance accounts for thermal ridges at the intersection with the vertical fenestration.
2. Doors

# Parapets shall comply with one or more of the following as applicable:

1. Where continuous insulation is installed on the exterior side of the above-grade wall and the roof is insulated with insulation entirely above deck, the continuous insulation shall extend up both sides of the parapet not less than 2 feet (610 mm) above the roof covering or to the top of the parapet, whichever is less. Parapets that are an integral part of a fire-resistance rated wall, and the exterior continuous insulation applied to the parapet, shall comply with the fire resistance ratings of the building code.
2. Where continuous insulation is installed on the exterior side of the above-grade wall and the roof insulation is below the roof deck, the continuous insulation shall extend up the exterior side of the parapet to not less than the height of the top surface of the roof assembly.
3. Where continuous insulation is not installed on the exterior side of the above-grade wall and the roof is insulated with insulation entirely above deck, the wall cavity or integral insulation shall extend into the parapet up to the exterior face of the roof insulation or equivalent R-value insulation shall be installed not less than 2 feet (610 mm) horizontally inward on the underside of the roof deck.
4. Where continuous insulation is not installed on the exterior side of the above-grade wall and the roof insulation is below the roof deck, the wall and roof insulation components shall be adjacent to each other at the roof-ceiling-wall intersection.

# An approved design where the above-grade wall-factor used for compliance accounts for the parapet thermal ridge.

# Mechanical systems and equipment serving the building heating, cooling, ventilating or refrigerating needs shall comply with one of the following:

1. Sections C403.1.1 and Sections C403.2 through Section C403.14
2. Data Centers shall comply with Section C403.1.1, Section C403.1.2 and Section C403.6 through Section C403.14
3. Section C403.1.3 and sections within Section C403 that are listed in Table C407.2(1).
Design loads associated with heating, ventilating and air conditioning of the building shall be determined in accordance with I HR CC or by an approved equivalent computational procedure using the design parameters specified in C. Heating and cooling loads shall be adjusted to account for load reductions that are achieved where energy recovery systems are utilized in the HVAC system in accordance with the HR H C H by an approved equivalent computational procedure.

Data center systems shall comply with Sections 6 and 8 of HR:

C H C H C T PR

C H C H C T PR HVAC systems serving buildings or portions of buildings listed in Section C403.1.3.1 that are not served by systems listed in Section C403.1.3.2 shall have an HVAC total system performance ratio (HVAC TSPR) of the proposed design HVAC systems that is greater than or equal to the HVAC TSPR of the standard reference design divided by the applicable mechanical performance factor (PF) from Table C40.4. HVAC TSPR shall be calculated in accordance with Section C40, Calculation of HVAC Total System Performance Ratio. Systems using the HVAC TSPR method shall also meet requirements in Section C403.1.3.3.

# Only HVAC systems that serve the following building use types are allowed to use the TSPR method:

1. Office (including medical office) (occupancy group)
2. Retail (occupancy group)
3. Library (occupancy group A-3)
4. Education (occupancy group E)
5. Hotel/motel occupancies (occupancy group R-1)
6. The dwelling units and common areas within occupancy group R-2 multifamily buildings.

# The following HVAC systems are excluded from using the TSPR method:

1. HVAC Systems using
# 1.4 A common heating source serving both HVAC and service water heating equipment, or

1. HVAC systems that provide recovered heat for service water heating
2. HVAC systems not included in Table C40.6.1.10.1
3. HVAC systems included in Table C40.6.1.10.1 with parameters in Table C40.6.1.10.2(1), not identified as applicable to that HVAC system type.
4. HVAC systems with chilled water supplied by absorption chillers, heat recovery chillers, water to water heat pumps, air to water heat pumps, or a combination of air- and water-cooled chillers on the same chilled water loop.
5. HVAC systems served by heating water plants that include air to water or water to water heat pumps.
6. Underfloor air distribution and displacement ventilation HVAC systems.
7. Space conditioning systems that do not include mechanical cooling.
8. HVAC systems serving laundry rooms, elevator rooms, mechanical rooms, electrical rooms, data centers, and computer rooms.
9. Buildings or areas of medical office buildings that comply fully with ASHRAE Standard 170, including but not limited to surgical centers, or that are required by other applicable codes or standards to provide 24/7 air handling unit operation
10. HVAC systems serving laboratories with fume hoods
11. Locker rooms with more than 2 showers
12. Natatoriums and rooms with saunas
13. Restaurants and commercial kitchens with total cooking capacity greater than 100,000 tu/h
14. Areas of buildings with commercial refrigeration equipment exceeding 100 kW of power input.
15. Cafeterias and dining rooms

# C T PR P P R

# C T PR P P R

HVAC systems using the HVAC Performance Rating Method shall meet relevant prescriptive requirements in Section C403 as follows:

1. Air economizers shall meet the requirements of Section C403.5.3.4 Relief of excess outdoor air and Section C403.5.5 Economizer fault detection and diagnostics.
2. Variable-air-volume system systems shall meet requirements of Sections C403.6.5, C403.6.6, and C403.6.
3. Hydronic systems shall meet the requirements of Section C403.4.4.
4. Plants with multiple chillers or boilers shall meet the requirements of Section C403.4.5.
5. Hydronic (Water Loop) Heat Pumps and Water-Cooled Unitary Air Conditioners shall meet the requirements of Section C403.4.3.3.
6. Cooling tower turndown shall meet requirements of Section C403.11.4.
7. Heating of unenclosed spaces shall meet the requirements of Section C403.14.1.
8. Hot-gas bypass shall meet the requirements of Section C403.3.3.
9. Systems shall meet the operable openings interlock requirements of Section C402.5.11.10 (staff note section C removed by CEC I and CE I). Refrigeration systems shall meet the requirements of Section C403.12.
Mechanical systems shall be designed to comply with C through C. Where elements of a building's mechanical systems are addressed in C through C, such elements shall comply with the applicable provisions of those sections.

HVAC systems serving buildings that are over 25,000 square feet (2323 m²) in floor area or that span more than one floor and are designed to operate or be occupied nonsimultaneously shall be divided into isolation areas. Each isolation area shall be equipped with isolation devices and controls configured to automatically shut off the supply of conditioned air and outdoor air to and exhaust air from the isolation area. Each isolation area shall be controlled independently by a device meeting the requirements of C. Central systems and plants shall be provided with controls and devices that will allow system and equipment operation for any length of time while serving only the smallest isolation area served by the system or plant.

1. Exhaust air and outdoor air connections to isolation areas where the fan system to which they connect is not greater than 5,000 cfm (2360 L/s).
2. Exhaust airflow from a single isolation area of less than 10 percent of the design airflow of the exhaust system to which it connects.
3. Isolation areas intended to operate continuously or intended to be inoperative only when all other isolation areas in a zone are inoperative.

Ventilation, either natural or mechanical, shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 4 of the International Mechanical Code. Where mechanical ventilation is provided, the system shall provide the capability to reduce the outdoor air supply to the minimum required by Chapter 4 of the International Mechanical Code.

Buildings with gross conditioned floor area of not less than 100,000 square feet (9290 m²) served by one or more HVAC systems that are controlled by a direct digital control (DDC) system shall include a fault detection and diagnostics (FDD) system to monitor the HVAC system's performance and automatically identify faults. The FDD system shall:

1. Include permanently installed sensors and devices to monitor HVAC system's performance.
2. Sample HVAC system performance at least once every 15 minutes.
3. Automatically identify and report HVAC system faults.
4. Automatically notify authorized personnel of identified HVAC system faults.
5. Automatically provide prioritized recommendations for repair of identified faults based on analysis of data collected from the sampling of HVAC system performance.
6. Be capable of transmitting the prioritized fault repair recommendations to remotely.
# Heating and Cooling Equipment

Heating and cooling equipment installed in mechanical systems shall be sized in accordance with C and shall be not less efficient in the use of energy than as specified in C.

The output capacity of heating and cooling equipment shall be not greater than that of the smallest available equipment size that exceeds the loads calculated in accordance with C. A single piece of equipment providing both heating and cooling shall satisfy this provision for one function with the capacity for the other function as small as possible, within available equipment options.

1. Required standby equipment and systems provided with controls and devices that allow such systems or equipment to operate automatically only when the primary equipment is not operating.
2. Multiple units of the same equipment type with combined capacities exceeding the design load and provided with controls that are configured to sequence the operation of each unit based on load.

Equipment shall meet the minimum efficiency requirements of T through C when tested and rated in accordance with the applicable test procedure. Plate-type liquid-to-liquid heat exchangers shall meet the minimum requirements of HRI. The efficiency shall be verified through certification under an approved certification program or, where a certification program does not exist, the equipment efficiency ratings shall be supported by data furnished by the manufacturer. Where multiple rating conditions or performance requirements are provided, the equipment shall satisfy all stated requirements. Where components, such as indoor or outdoor coils, from different manufacturers are used, calculations and supporting data shall be furnished by the designer that demonstrates that the combined efficiency of the specified components meets the requirements herein.
# Current Page

| TYP                                                                  | C T GORY     | CTIO | R TI G CO ITIO  | I I            | H I G      | C T GORY OR | T |
| -------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------ | ---- | --------------- | -------------- | ---------- | ----------- | - |
| IP                                                                   | T            |      |                 |                |            |             |   |
| Air conditioners, air cooled                                         | 65,000 tu/h  | All  | before 1/1/2023 | after 1/1/2023 | 13.0 SEER  | HRI         |   |
| Single-package, three phase and applications outside US single phase |              |      | before 1/1/2023 | after 1/1/2023 | 13.4 SEER2 |             |   |
| Space constrained, air cooled                                        | 30,000 tu/h  | All  | before 1/1/2023 | after 1/1/2023 | 12.0 SEER  | HRI         |   |
| Single package, three phase and applications outside US single phase |              |      | before 1/1/2023 | after 1/1/2023 | 11.7 SEER2 |             |   |
| Small duct, high velocity, air cooled                                | 65,000 tu/h  | All  | before 1/1/2023 | after 1/1/2023 | 12.0 SEER  | HRI         |   |
| Split system, three phase and applications outside US single phase   |              |      | before 1/1/2023 | after 1/1/2023 | 12.1 SEER2 |             |   |
| Air conditioners, electric resistance                                | 65,000 tu/h  |      | before 1/1/2023 |                | 12. IEER   | HRI         |   |
| Split system and single package                                      | 135,000 tu/h |      | before 1/1/2023 | after 1/1/2023 | 14.8 IEER  |             |   |

# 11.0 EER

# 12.7 IEER

before 1/1/2023

# All other

# 14.6 IEER

after 1/1/2023

# 11.0 EER

# 12.4 IEER

# Electric resistance (or none)

135,000 tu/h and 240,000 tu/h

# 14.2 IEER

after 1/1/2023

# 10.8 EER

# 12.2 IEER

before 1/1/2023

# All other

# 14.0 IEER

after 1/1/2023

# 10.0 EER

# 11.6 IEER

# Electric resistance (or none)

240,000 tu/h and 760,000 tu/h

# .8 EER

# 11.4 IEER

# All other

# Split system and single package

before 1/1/2023

# HRI

# 13.0 IEER

after 1/1/2023

# .7 EER

# 11.2 IEER

760,000 tu/h Electric resistance (or none)

before 1/1/2023

# 12.5 IEER

after 1/1/2023
| Air conditioners, water cooled |                               | EER  | IEER                            |                |                 |
| ------------------------------ | ----------------------------- | ---- | ------------------------------- | -------------- | --------------- |
| 65,000 tu/h                    | All                           | 12.1 | HRI                             | 12.3           | before 1/1/2023 |
| 65,000 tu/h                    | Electric resistance (or none) | 12.1 | 12.3                            | after 1/1/2023 |                 |
| 135,000 tu/h                   | All                           | 13.7 | HRI                             | 12.5           | before 1/1/2023 |
| 135,000 tu/h                   | Electric resistance (or none) | 13.0 | 12.5                            | after 1/1/2023 |                 |
| 240,000 tu/h                   | All                           | 12.3 | Split system and single package | 13.7           | before 1/1/2023 |
| 240,000 tu/h                   | Electric resistance (or none) | 12.4 | 13.6                            | after 1/1/2023 |                 |
| 760,000 tu/h                   | All                           | 12.2 | HRI                             | 13.4           | before 1/1/2023 |
| 760,000 tu/h                   | Electric resistance (or none) | 12.2 | 13.5                            | after 1/1/2023 |                 |

| Air conditioners, evaporatively cooled |                               | EER  | IEER                            |      |     |
| -------------------------------------- | ----------------------------- | ---- | ------------------------------- | ---- | --- |
| 65,000 tu/h                            | All                           | 12.1 | HRI                             | 12.3 |     |
| 65,000 tu/h                            | Electric resistance (or none) | 12.1 | 12.3                            |      |     |
| 135,000 tu/h                           | All                           | 11.0 | Split system and single package | 12.1 | HRI |
| 135,000 tu/h                           | Electric resistance (or none) | 12.0 | 12.2                            |      |     |
| 240,000 tu/h                           | All                           | 11.8 |                                 | 12.0 |     |

| 240,000                                | Electric     | 11. EER       |
| -------------------------------------- | ------------ | ------------- |
| 760,000                                | (or none)    | 11.7 EER      |
| 760,000                                | All other    | 11. IEER      |
| 760,000                                | Electric     | 11.7 EER      |
| 760,000                                | resistance   | 11. IEER      |
| 760,000                                | (or none)    | 11.5 EER      |
| 760,000                                | All other    | 11.7 EER      |
| Condensing units, air cooled           | 135,000 tu/h | 10.5 EER      |
|                                        |              | 11.8 IEER HRI |
| Condensing units, water cooled         | 135,000 tu/h | 13.5 EER      |
|                                        |              | 14.0 IEER HRI |
| Condensing units, evaporatively cooled | 135,000 tu/h | 13.5 EER      |
|                                        |              | 14.0 IEER     |

For SI: 1 British thermal unit per hour = 0.231 W.

1. C contains a complete specification of the referenced standards, which include test procedures, including the reference year version of the test procedure.
2. Single-phase, US air-cooled air conditioners less than 65,000 tu/h are regulated as consumer products by the US Department of Energy Code of Federal Regulations (CFR). SEER and SEER2 values for single-phase products are set by the US Department of Energy.
3. CFR Subpart Appendix 1 includes the test procedure updates effective 1/1/2023 that will be incorporated in HRI.
4. This table is a replica of HRI Table 6.8.1-1 Electrically Operated Unitary Air Conditioners and Condensing Units Minimum Efficiency Requirements.
# Current Page

| Type                                   | Cooling Mode   | Capacity (tu/h) | Efficiency       | AHRI      |            |                 |                 |           |
| -------------------------------------- | -------------- | --------------- | ---------------- | --------- | ---------- | --------------- | --------------- | --------- |
| All                                    | Single Phase   | Before 1/1/2023 | After 1/1/2023   |           |            |                 |                 |           |
| Air cooled                             | (cooling mode) | 66,000          | US single phaseᵇ | 14.0 SEER | 14.3 SEER2 | AHRI 210/240    | 2017            |           |
| Single package                         | (cooling mode) | 66,000          | US single phaseᵇ | 14.0 SEER | 13.4 SEER2 | AHRI 210/240    | 2023            |           |
| Space constrained, air cooled          | (cooling mode) | 30,000          | US single phaseᵇ | 12.0 SEER | 11.7 SEER2 | AHRI 210/240    | 2017            |           |
| Single package                         | (cooling mode) | 30,000          | US single phaseᵇ | 12.0 SEER | 11.7 SEER2 | AHRI 210/240    | 2023            |           |
| Single duct, high velocity, air cooled | (cooling mode) | 65,000          | US single phaseᵇ | 12.0 SEER | 12.0 SEER2 | AHRI 210/240    | 2017            |           |
| Electric resistance                    |                | (or none)       | 65,000           | All other | 11.0 EER   | 12.2 IEER       | Before 1/1/2023 | 14.1 IEER |
| Air cooled                             | (cooling mode) | 135,000         | All other        | 10.8 EER  | 12.0 IEER  | Before 1/1/2023 | 13. IEER        |           |
| Electric resistance                    |                | (or none)       | 135,000          | All other | 10.6 EER   | 11.6 IEER       | Before 1/1/2023 | 13.5 IEER |
| Air cooled                             | (cooling mode) | 240,000         | All other        | 10.4 EER  | 11.4 IEER  | Before 1/1/2023 | 13.3 IEER       |           |

# Electric

| Resistance   | IEER before 1/1/2023 | IEER after 1/1/2023 |
| ------------ | -------------------- | ------------------- |
| 240,000 tu/h | 12.5                 | 10.3                |
| All other    | IEER before 1/1/2023 | IEER after 1/1/2023 |
|              | 12.3                 |                     |

# Split system, three phase and Air cooled

| Heating Mode                                         | 65,000 tu/h | All US single phaseᵇ |
| ---------------------------------------------------- | ----------- | -------------------- |
| Single package, three phase and applications outside | 8.0 HSPF    | AHRI 210/240 2023    |
|                                                      | 6.7 HSPF2   | after 1/1/2023       |

# Space constrained, air cooled

| Heating Mode                                         | 30,000 tu/h | All US single phaseᵇ |
| ---------------------------------------------------- | ----------- | -------------------- |
| Single package, three phase and applications outside | 7.4 HSPF    | AHRI 210/240 2023    |
|                                                      | 6.3 HSPF2   | after 1/1/2023       |

# Small duct, high velocity, air cooled

| Heating Mode                                       | 65,000 tu/h | All US single phaseᵇ |
| -------------------------------------------------- | ----------- | -------------------- |
| Split system, three phase and applications outside | 7.2 HSPF    | AHRI 210/240 2017    |
|                                                    | 6.1 HSPF2   | after 1/1/2023       |

# Air cooled (cooling capacity)

| All | 135,000 tu/h | 47 F db/43 F wb outdoor air |
| --- | ------------ | --------------------------- |
|     | 3.30 COPH    | before 1/1/2023             |
|     | 3.40 COPH    | after 1/1/2023              |

# Air cooled (heating mode)

| All | 135,000 tu/h | 17 F db/15 F wb outdoor air |
| --- | ------------ | --------------------------- |
|     | 2.25 COP     |                             |
|     | 3.20 COPᴴ    | AHRI 340/360 H              |
|     | 240,000 tu/h |                             |
|     | 3.30 SOPH    | after 1/1/2023              |
|     | 2.05 COP     |                             |

# Cooling Capacity

| 240,000         | 47 F db/43 F wb | 3.20 COPH          |
| --------------- | --------------- | ------------------ |
| tu/h            | outdoor air     | (cooling capacity) |
| 17 F db/15 F wb | 2.05 COP        | outdoor air        |

For SI: 1 British thermal unit per hour = 0.2931 W, C (F) = 32 / 1.8, wb = wet bulb, db = dry bulb.

# Notes

1. Chapter 6 contains a complete specification of the referenced standards, which include test procedures, including the reference year version of the test procedure.
2. Single-phase, US air-cooled heat pumps less than 65,000 tu/h are regulated as consumer products by the US Department of Energy Code of Federal Regulations DOE 10 CFR 430. SEER, SEER2 and HSPF values for single-phase products are set by the US Department of Energy.
3. DOE 10 CFR 430 Subpart Appendix 1 includes the test procedure updates effective 1/1/2023 that will be incorporated in AHRI 210/240 2023.
4. This table is a replica of ASHRAE 0.1 Table 6.8.1-2 Electrically Operated Air-Cooled Unitary Heat Pumps Minimum Efficiency Requirements.
# Current Page

# Chiller Types and Categories

| Air cooled chillers                                 | 150 tons       | EER      | 10.100 FL | 13.700 IPLV.IP | 15.800 IPLV.IP | AHRI 550/5 0  |              |
| --------------------------------------------------- | -------------- | -------- | --------- | -------------- | -------------- | ------------- | ------------ |
|                                                     | 150 tons       | Wh       | 10.100 FL | 14.000 IPLV.IP | 16.100 IPLV.IP |               |              |
| Air cooled without condenser, electrically operated | All capacities | EER      | 0.750 FL  | 0.780 FL       | 0.600 IPLV.IP  | 0.500 IPLV.IP |              |
|                                                     | 75 tons        | 0.720 FL | 0.750 FL  | 0.560 IPLV.IP  | 0.440 IPLV.IP  |               |              |
| Water cooled, electrically operated                 | 150 tons       | kW/ton   | 0.660 FL  | 0.680 FL       | 0.540 IPLV.IP  | 0.440 IPLV.IP | AHRI 550/5 0 |
|                                                     | 300 tons       | 0.610 FL | 0.625 FL  | 0.520 IPLV.IP  | 0.410 IPLV.IP  |               |              |
|                                                     | 600 tons       | 0.560 FL | 0.585 FL  | 0.500 IPLV.IP  | 0.380 IPLV.IP  |               |              |
| Water cooled, electrically operated centrifugal     | 300 tons       | kW/ton   | 0.560 FL  | 0.555 FL       | 0.520 IPLV.IP  | 0.330 IPLV.IP | AHRI 550/5 0 |
|                                                     | 400 tons       | 0.560 FL | 0.585 FL  | 0.500 IPLV.IP  | 0.380 IPLV.IP  |               |              |
|                                                     | 600 tons       | 0.560 FL | 0.585 FL  | 0.500 IPLV.IP  | 0.380 IPLV.IP  |               |              |
| Air cooled absorption, single effect                | All capacities | COP      | 0.600 FL  | NAᵈ            | AHRI 560       |               |              |

# Water cooled

| Absorption | All | COP | 0.700 | FL | NA | AHRI 560 |          |
| ---------- | --- | --- | ----- | -- | -- | -------- | -------- |
| Absorption | All | COP | 1.000 | FL | d  | NA       | AHRI 560 |
| Absorption | All | COP | 1.000 | FL | d  | NA       | AHRI 560 |
| Absorption | All | COP | 1.000 | FL | d  | NA       | AHRI 560 |

a. Chapter 6 contains a complete specification of the referenced standards, which include test procedures, including the reference year version of the test procedure.

b. The requirements for centrifugal chillers shall be adjusted for nonstandard rating conditions per Section C403.3.2.1 and are applicable only for the range of conditions listed there. The requirements for air-cooled, water-cooled positive displacement and absorption chillers are at standard rating conditions defined in the reference test procedure.

c. Both the full-load and IPLV.IP requirements must be met or exceeded to comply with this standard. When there is a Path 1, compliance can be with either Path A or Path B for any application.

d. NA means the requirements are not applicable for Path 1, and only Path A can be used for compliance.

e. FL is the full-load performance requirements, and IPLV.IP is for the part-load performance requirements.

f. This table is a replica of ASHRAE 90.1 Table 6.8.1-3 Water-Chilling Packages Minimum Efficiency Requirements.
# Current Page

| T C                                        |                        | CTRIC Y OP R T P C G T R I IR CO ITIO R P C G |                       |   |   |
| ------------------------------------------ | ---------------------- | --------------------------------------------- | --------------------- | - | - |
| T R I H T P P I G P C G                    |                        | RTIC IR CO ITIO R I G                         |                       |   |   |
| P C G RTIC H T P P ROO IR CO ITIO R ROO IR |                        |                                               |                       |   |   |
| CO ITIO R H T P P I I ICI CY R IR T        |                        |                                               |                       |   |   |
| TYP                                        | C T GORY               | I I                                           | T T                   |   |   |
| C T GORY                                   | OR R TI G              | ICI CY                                        | PROC R                |   |   |
| 7,000                                      | 11. EER                | tu/h                                          | PTAC (cooling mode)   |   |   |
| 7,000                                      | 14.0 (0.300 Cap/1,000) | HRI                                           | standard si e         |   |   |
| 15,000                                     | outdoor airᶜ           | EERᵈ                                          | tu/h                  |   |   |
| 15,000                                     | .5 EER                 | tu/h                                          |                       |   |   |
| 7,000                                      | .4 EER                 | tu/h                                          |                       |   |   |
| PTAC (cooling mode)                        | 7,000                  | 5 F db/75 F wb                                | 10. (0.213 Cap/1,000) |   |   |
| HRI                                        | 15,000                 | outdoor air                                   | EERᵈ                  |   |   |
| 15,000                                     | 7.7 EER                | tu/h                                          |                       |   |   |
| 7,000                                      | 11. EER                | tu/h                                          |                       |   |   |
| PTHP (cooling mode)                        | 7,000                  | 14.0 (0.300 Cap/1,000)                        | HRI                   |   |   |
| standard si e                              | 15,000                 | outdoor airᶜ                                  | EERᵈ                  |   |   |
| 15,000                                     | .5 EER                 | tu/h                                          |                       |   |   |
| 7,000                                      | .3 EER                 | tu/h                                          |                       |   |   |
| PTHP (cooling mode)                        | 7,000                  | 10.8 (0.213 Cap/1,000)                        | HRI                   |   |   |
| nonstandard si eᵇ                          | 15,000                 | outdoor airᶜ                                  | EERᵈ                  |   |   |
| 15,000                                     | 7.6 EER                | tu/h                                          |                       |   |   |
| PTHP (heating mode)                        | 7,000                  | 47 F db/43 F wb                               | 3.3 COPH              |   |   |
| HRI                                        | tu/h                   | outdoor air                                   |                       |   |   |

# Performance Data

| 7,000                  | 3.7 (0.052 Cap/1,000) |                         |
| ---------------------- | --------------------- | ----------------------- |
| 15,000                 | COPHᵈ                 |                         |
| 15,000                 | 2.0 COPH              |                         |
| 7,000                  | 2.7 COPH              |                         |
| PTHP (heating mode)    | 7,000                 | 2. (0.026 Cap/1000) HRI |
| 15,000                 | outdoor air           | COPHᵈ                   |
| 15,000                 | 2.5 COPH              |                         |
| 65,000                 | 11.0 EER              |                         |
| 65,000                 |                       |                         |
| SPVAC (cooling mode)   | tu/h and              | 10.0 EER                |
| 135,000                | 5 F db/75 F wb        | HRI                     |
| single and three phase | tu/h                  |                         |
| 135,000                | tu/h and              | 10.0 EER                |
| 240,000                | tu/h                  |                         |
| 65,000                 | 11.0 EER              |                         |
| 65,000                 | tu/h and              | 10.0 EER                |
| SPVHP (cooling mode)   | 135,000               | 5 F db/75 F wb          |
| tu/h                   | outdoor airᶜ          |                         |
| 135,000                | tu/h and              | 10.1 EER                |
| 240,000                | tu/h                  |                         |
| 65,000                 | 3.3 COPH              |                         |
| 65,000                 | tu/h and              | 3.0 COPH                |
| SPVHP (heating mode)   | 135,000               | 47 F db/43 F wb         |
| tu/h                   | outdoor air           |                         |
| 135,000                | tu/h and              | 3.0 COPH                |
| 240,000                | tu/h                  |                         |

# Room Air Conditioners

# Without Reverse Cycle

| 6,000 tu/h  | 11.0 CEER |
| ----------- | --------- |
| 8,000 tu/h  | 10.0 CEER |
| 14,000 tu/h | 10.7 CEER |
| 20,000 tu/h | 9.4 CEER  |
| 28,000 tu/h | 8.0 CEER  |

# Without Louvered Sides

| 6,000 tu/h  | 10.0 CEER |
| ----------- | --------- |
| 8,000 tu/h  | 9.6 CEER  |
| 11,000 tu/h | 9.5 CEER  |
| 14,000 tu/h | 9.3 CEER  |
| 20,000 tu/h | 8.4 CEER  |

# With Reverse Cycle

| 20,000 tu/h | 8.3 CEER |
| ----------- | -------- |
| 14,000 tu/h | 9.3 CEER |

# 14,000

# 8.7 CEER

| Room air conditioners, casement | All | 0.5 CEER  | I | H |
| ------------------------------- | --- | --------- | - | - |
| Room air conditioners, casement | All | 10.4 CEER | I | H |

For SI: 1 British thermal unit per hour = 0.2 31 W, C (F) 32 /1.8, wb wet bulb, db dry bulb.

“Cap” The rated cooling capacity of the project in tu/h. Where the unit's capacity is less than 7,000 tu/h, use 7,000 tu/h in the calculation. Where the unit's capacity is greater than 15,000 tu/h, use 15,000 tu/h in the calculations.

1. C contains a complete specification of the referenced standards, which include test procedures, including the reference year version of the test procedure.
2. Nonstandard size units must be factory labeled as follows: “MANUFACTURED FOR NONSTANDARD SIZE APPLICATIONS ONLY - NOT TO BE INSTALLED IN NEW STANDARD PROJECTS.” Nonstandard size efficiencies apply only to units being installed in existing sleeves having an external wall opening of less than 16 inches (406 mm) high or less than 42 inches (1067 mm) wide and having a cross-sectional area less than 670 square inches (0.43 m²).
3. The cooling-mode wet bulb temperature requirement only applies for units that reflect condensate to the condenser coil.
4. “Cap” in EER and COPH equations for PTACs and PTHPs means cooling capacity in tu/h at 5°F outdoor dry-bulb temperature.
5. This table is a replica of HR Table 6.8.1-4 Electrically Operated Packaged Terminal Air Conditioners, Packaged Terminal Heat Pumps, Single-Package Vertical Air Conditioners, Single-Package Vertical Heat Pumps, Room Air Conditioners, and Room Air-Conditioner Heat Pumps Minimum Efficiency Requirements.
# TC RIRRC CO ITIO RIRRC IR CO ITIO I G

# IT RIR CT R C IT H T R I I ICI CY RIR T

| IP T TYP                                                   | C T GORY                                       | I I T T               |
| ---------------------------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------- | --------------------- |
| Warm-air furnace, gas fired for application outside the US | 225,000 tu/h maximum capacityᶜ                 | 80 AFUE or 81 AFUE    |
| Warm-air furnace, gas fired                                | 225,000 tu/h maximum capacityᶜ before 1/1/2023 | 81 Eₜᵈ after 1/1/2023 |
| Warm-air furnace, oil fired for application outside the US | 225,000 tu/h maximum capacityᶜ                 | 78 AFUE or 80 Eₜb, d  |
| Warm-air furnace, oil fired                                | 225,000 tu/h maximum capacityᶜ before 1/1/2023 | 82 Eₜᵈ after 1/1/2023 |
| Electric furnaces for applications outside the US          | 225,000 tu/h All                               | 6 AFUE                |
| Warm-air duct furnaces, gas fired                          | All maximum capacityᶜ                          | 80 E e, c             |
| Warm-air unit heaters, gas fired                           | All maximum capacityᶜ                          | 80 E e, f             |
| Warm-air unit heaters, oil fired                           | All maximum capacityᶜ                          | 80 E e, f             |

For SI: 1 British thermal unit per hour = 0.2 31 W.

a. C contains a complete specification of the referenced standards, which include test procedures, including the reference year version of the test procedure.

b. Combination units (i.e., furnaces contained within the same cabinet as an air conditioner) not covered by O C R (i.e., three-phase power or with cooling capacity greater than or
# Compliance Standards for Heating Units

Units equal to 65,000 tu/h may comply with either rating. All other units greater than 225,000 tu/h sold in the US must meet the AFUE standards for consumer products and test using USDOE's AFUE test procedure at O C R, Subpart, Appendix N.

1. Compliance of multiple firing rate units shall be at the maximum firing rate.
2. Eₜ thermal efficiency. Units must also include an interrupted or intermittent ignition device (IID), have jacket losses not exceeding 0.75 percent of the input rating, and have either power venting or a flue damper. A vent damper is an acceptable alternative to a flue damper for those furnaces where combustion air is drawn from the conditioned space.
3. E combustion efficiency (100 percent less flue losses). See test procedure for detailed discussion.
4. Units must also include an interrupted or intermittent ignition device (IID) and have either power venting or an automatic flue damper.

This table is a replica of HR Table 6.8.1-5 Warm-Air Furnaces and Combination Warm-Air Furnaces/Air-Conditioning Units, Warm-Air Duct Furnaces, and Unit Heaters Minimum Efficiency Requirements.
| T C                            |                          |
| ------------------------------ | ------------------------ |
| G OI IR OI R I I ICI CY R IR T | IP T C T GORY            |
| TYP OR R TI G                  | C T GORY ICI CY O PROC R |
| CO ITIO                        | 300,000 tu/hg,           |
| h for applications             | 82 AFUE 82 AFUE Appendix |
| outside                        | N                        |
| Gas fired                      | 300,000 tu/h             |
| and                            | 80 Eᵈ 80 E d             |
| 2,500,000 t                    | tu/hᵉ                    |
| 2,500,000                      | 82 Ecc 82 Ecc            |
| oilers, hot                    | 300,000 tu/hg,h for      |
| applications                   | 84 AFUE 84 AFUE Appendix |
| outside                        | N                        |
| Oil firedᶠ                     | 300,000 tu/h             |
| and                            | 82 Eᵈ 82 E d             |
| 2,500,000 t                    | tu/hᵉ                    |
| 2,500,000                      | 84 E c 84 E c            |
| 300,000 tu/hᵍ                  | O C R                    |
| Gas fired                      | for applications         |
| 80 AFUE 80 AFUE                | Appendix                 |
| outside                        | N                        |
| 300,000 tu/h                   | Gas fired all,           |
| except natural                 | 7 Eᵈ 7 E d               |
| oilers, draft                  | 2,500,000 t              |
| steam                          | tu/hᵉ                    |
| 2,500,000                      | 7 Eᵈ 7 E d               |
| tu/hᵇ                          | t                        |
| DOE 10 CFR                     | 431.86                   |
| 300,000 tu/h                   | and                      |
| 77 Eᵈ 7 E d                    | Gas fired natural        |
| draft                          | 2,500,000 t              |
| tu/hᵉ                          | 2,500,000                |
| 77 Eᵈ 7 E d                    | tu/hᵇ                    |
| t                              | t                        |

# 300,000 tu/hᵍ

for applications outside US

# Oil firedᶠ

| 300,000 tu/h    | 81 Eₜᵈ |
| --------------- | ------ |
| 2,500,000 tu/hᵉ | 81 Eᵈ  |
| 2,500,000 tu/hᵇ | t      |

For SI: 1 British thermal unit per hour = 0.293 W.

1. C contains a complete specification of the referenced standards, which include test procedures, including the reference year version of the test procedure.
2. These requirements apply to boilers with rated input of 8,000,000 tu/h or less that are not packaged boilers and to all packaged boilers. Minimum efficiency requirements for boilers cover all capacities of packaged boilers.
3. E Combustion efficiency (100 percent less flue losses).
4. Eₜ Thermal efficiency.
5. Maximum capacity minimum and maximum ratings as provided for and allowed by the unit's controls.
6. Includes oil-fired (residual).
7. Boilers shall not be equipped with a constant burning pilot light.
8. A boiler not equipped with a tankless domestic water-heating coil shall be equipped with an automatic means for adjusting the temperature of the water such that an incremental change in inferred heat load produces a corresponding incremental change in the temperature of the water supplied.
9. This table is a replica of HR Table 6.8.1-6 Gas- and Oil-Fired Boilers Minimum Efficiency Requirements.
# Current Page

| Type                                                          | Category | Condition | Entering    | Leaving      | gpm/hp           | Standard         |                  |
| ------------------------------------------------------------- | -------- | --------- | ----------- | ------------ | ---------------- | ---------------- | ---------------- |
| Propeller or axial fan open-circuit cooling towers            | All      | 85 F      | 40.2 gpm/hp | and CTI      | 75 F entering wb | STD-201 RS       |                  |
| Centrifugal fan open-circuit cooling towers                   | All      | 85 F      | 20.0 gpm/hp | and CTI      | 75 F entering wb | STD-201 RS       |                  |
| Propeller or axial fan closed-circuit cooling towers          | All      | 102 F     | 0 F         | 16.1 gpm/hp  | and CTI          | 75 F entering wb | STD-201 RS       |
| Centrifugal fan closed-circuit cooling towers                 | All      | 102 F     | 0 F         | 7.0 gpm/hp   | and CTI          | 75 F entering wb | STD-201 RS       |
| Propeller or axial fan dry coolers (air-cooled fluid coolers) | All      | 115 F     | 105 F       | 4.5 gpm/hp   | TC               | 5 F entering wb  |                  |
| Propeller or axial fan evaporative condensers                 | All      | 165 F     | 105 F       | 160,000 tu/h | hp               | CTI TC           | 75 F entering wb |

# Ammonia test

# fluid

| Propeller or axial fan | evaporative condensers | All | gas temperature                | 134,000 tu/h                   | CTI TC       |   |
| ---------------------- | ---------------------- | --- | ------------------------------ | ------------------------------ | ------------ | - |
|                        |                        |     | 6.3 F                          | hp                             |              |   |
|                        |                        |     | condensing temperature         | 75 F entering wb               |              |   |
|                        | R-448A test fluid      |     |                                | 165 F entering gas temperature | 137,000 tu/h |   |
| Centrifugal fan        | evaporative condensers | All | 105 F                          | hp                             | CTI TC       |   |
|                        |                        |     | condensing temperature         | 75 F entering wb               |              |   |
| Ammonia test fluid     |                        |     | 140 F entering gas temperature | 110,000 tu/h                   | CTI TC       |   |
|                        |                        |     | 6.3 F                          | hp                             |              |   |
|                        |                        |     | condensing temperature         | 75 F entering wb               |              |   |
| 125 F                  | Air-cooled condensers  | All | temperature                    | 176,000 tu/h                   | hp           |   |
|                        |                        |     | 10 F entering gas temperature  |                                | HRI          |   |
|                        |                        |     | 15 F subcooling                | 5 F entering db                |              |   |

For SI: C (F) 32 /1.8, L/s kW (gpm/hp)/(11.83), COP (tu/h hp)/(2550.7), db dry bulb temperature, wb wet bulb temperature.

1. C contains a complete specification of the referenced standards, which include test procedures, including the reference year version of the test procedure.
2. For purposes of this table, open-circuit cooling tower performance is defined as the water-flow rating of the tower at the thermal rating condition listed in the table divided by the fan motor nameplate power.
3. For purposes of this table, closed-circuit cooling tower performance is defined as the process water-flow rating of the tower at the thermal rating condition listed in the table divided by the sum of the fan motor nameplate power and the integral spray pump motor nameplate power.
4. For purposes of this table, dry-cooler performance is defined as the process water-flow rating of the unit at the thermal rating condition listed in the table divided by the total fan motor nameplate power of the unit, and air-cooled condenser performance is defined as the heat reflected from the refrigerant divided by the total fan motor nameplate power of the unit.
5. The efficiencies and test procedures for both open- and closed-circuit cooling towers are not applicable to hybrid cooling towers that contain a combination of separate wet and dry heat exchange sections. The certification requirements do not apply to field-erected cooling towers.
6. All cooling towers shall comply with the minimum efficiency listed in the table for that specific.
type of tower with the capacity effect of any project-specific accessories and/or options included in the capacity of the cooling tower.

For purposes of this table, evaporative condenser performance is defined as the heat reflected at the specified rating condition in the table, divided by the sum of the fan motor nameplate power and the integral spray pump nameplate power.

Requirements for evaporative condensers are listed with ammonia (R-717) and R-448A as test fluids in the table. Evaporative condensers intended for use with halocarbon refrigerants other than R-448A must meet the minimum efficiency requirements listed with R-448A as the test fluid. For ammonia, the condensing temperature is defined as the saturation temperature corresponding to the refrigerant pressure at the condenser entrance. For R-448A, which is a zeotropic refrigerant, the condensing temperature is defined as the arithmetic average of the dew point and the bubble point temperatures corresponding to the refrigerant pressure at the condenser entrance.

This table is a replica of HR Table 6.8.1-7 Performance Requirements for Heat Reflection Equipment Minimum Efficiency Requirements.
# Current Page

# CTRIC Y OP R T RI R RIG R T O IR

# CO ITIO R I I ICI CY R IR T

# IP T I H TI G C T GORY OR I I T T

# TYP C T GORY CTIO R TI G ICI CY PROC R TYP CO ITIO

| 65,000     | All        | VRF multisplit | 13.0 SEER      |                |          |
| ---------- | ---------- | -------------- | -------------- | -------------- | -------- |
| 65,000     | Electric   | resistance     | VRF multisplit | 13.1 IEER      |          |
| 135,000    | (or none)  | VRF multisplit | 15.5 IEER      |                |          |
| VRF air    | 135,000    | Electric       | resistance     | VRF multisplit | 12. IEER |
| air cooled | 240,000    | (or none)      | system         | 14. IEER       |          |
| 240,000    | Electric   | VRF multisplit | 10.0 EER       |                |          |
| 240,000    | resistance | system         | 11.6 IEER      |                |          |
| (or none)  |            |                | 13. IEER       |                |          |

For SI: 1 British thermal unit per hour = 0.2 31 W.

a. C contains a complete specification of the referenced standards, which include test procedures, including the reference year version of the test procedure.

b. This table is a replica of HR Table 6.8.1-8 Electrically Operated Variable-Refrigerant-Flow Air Conditioners Minimum Efficiency Requirements.
# Current Page

# CTRIC Y OP R T RI R RIG R T O PP I H T

# IP T I H TI G C T GORY I I T T

# TYP C T GORY CTIO OR R TI G ICI CY PROC R

| 65,000           | All                 | 13.0 SEER           |                |           |     |
| ---------------- | ------------------- | ------------------- | -------------- | --------- | --- |
| 65,000           | tu/h                | VRF multisplit      | 11.0 EER       |           |     |
| 65,000           |                     | system              | 12. IEER       |           |     |
| 135,000          | tu/h                | VRF multisplit      | 10.8 EER       |           |     |
| 135,000          |                     | system              | 12.7 IEER      |           |     |
|                  |                     | with heat recovery  | 14.4 IEER      |           |     |
| VRF air cooled   | 135,000             | Electric            | system         | 12.3 IEER | HRI |
| 240,000          | tu/h                | resistance          | VRF multisplit | 10.4 EER  |     |
| 240,000          |                     | system              | 12.1 IEER      |           |     |
|                  |                     | with heat recovery  | 13.7 IEER      |           |     |
| VRF multisplit   |                     | system              | 11.0 IEER      |           |     |
| 240,000          | tu/h                | VRF multisplit      |                | 12.7 IEER |     |
|                  |                     | system              | 10.8 EER       |           |     |
|                  |                     | with heat recovery  | 12.5 IEER      |           |     |
|                  | VRF multisplit      | 12.0 EER            | systems        | 16.0 IEER |     |
| 65,000           | tu/h                | VRF multisplit      | 11.8 EER       |           |     |
|                  |                     | with heat recovery  | 15.8 IEER      |           |     |
|                  |                     | 86 F entering water |                |           |     |
| VRF water source | 65,000              | All                 | system         | 16.0 IEER | HRI |
| 135,000          | tu/h                | VRF multisplit      | 11.8 EER       |           |     |
|                  |                     | with heat recovery  | 15.8 IEER      |           |     |
| 135,000          | tu/h                | VRF multisplit      | 10.0 EER       |           |     |
| 240,000          | 86 F entering water | 14.0 IEER           |                |           |     |

# VRF multisplit system

# Cooling Mode

| 240,000 | tu/h | VRF multisplit system | 0.8 EER  | with heat recovery | 13.8 IEER | 86 F entering water |
| ------- | ---- | --------------------- | -------- | ------------------ | --------- | ------------------- |
| 135,000 | tu/h | VRF multisplit system | 16.2 EER |                    |           | 5 F entering water  |
| 135,000 | tu/h | VRF multisplit system | 13.8 EER | with heat recovery |           | 5 F entering water  |
| 135,000 | tu/h | VRF multisplit system | 13.6 EER | with heat recovery |           | 5 F entering water  |
| 135,000 | tu/h | VRF multisplit system | 13.4 EER |                    |           | 77 F entering water |
| 135,000 | tu/h | VRF multisplit system | 11.0 EER | with heat recovery |           | 77 F entering water |
| 135,000 | tu/h | VRF multisplit system | 10.8 EER | with heat recovery |           | 77 F entering water |

# Heating Mode

| 65,000 | tu/h | VRF air cooled | 7.7 HSPF | VRF multisplit system |   | (cooling capacity) |
| ------ | ---- | -------------- | -------- | --------------------- | - | ------------------ |

# VRF Multisplit System Specifications

| Cooling Capacity             | System Type    | COPH     | Outdoor Air Conditions |
| ---------------------------- | -------------- | -------- | ---------------------- |
| 65,000 tu/h                  | VRF multisplit | 3.3 COPH | 47 F db/43 F wb        |
| 135,000 tu/h                 | VRF multisplit | 2.25 COP | 17 F db/15 F wb        |
| 135,000 tu/h                 | VRF multisplit | 3.2 COPH | 47 F db/43 F wb        |
| 65,000 tu/h                  | VRF multisplit | 4.2 COPH | 68 F entering water    |
| 65,000 tu/h and 135,000 tu/h | VRF multisplit | 4.2 COPH | 68 F entering water    |
| 135,000 tu/h                 | VRF multisplit | 3. COPH  | 68 F entering water    |
| 240,000 tu/h                 | VRF multisplit | 3. COPH  | 68 F entering water    |
| 135,000 tu/h                 | VRF multisplit | 3.6 COPH | 50 F entering water    |
| 135,000 tu/h                 | VRF multisplit | 3.3 COPH | 50 F entering water    |
| 135,000 tu/h                 | VRF multisplit | 3.1 COPH | 32 F entering water    |

# VRF Multisplit System

135,000 tu/h cooling capacity

2.8 COPH

32 F entering water

For SI: C (F) 32 /1.8, 1 British thermal unit per hour 0.2 31 W, db dry bulb temperature, wb wet bulb temperature.

1. C contains a complete specification of the referenced standards, which include test procedures, including the reference year version of the test procedure.
2. This table is a replica of HR Table 6.8.1 - Electrically Operated Variable-Refrigerant-Flow and Applied Heat Pumps Minimum Efficiency Requirements.
# Current Conditions

# Type

| OOR | O | IR | CO  | ITIO | R | CO | I    | G  | IT   | R | I | G | CO | P | T | R |
| --- | - | -- | --- | ---- | - | -- | ---- | -- | ---- | - | - | - | -- | - | - | - |
| ROO | I | I  | ICI | CY   | R | IR | T    | CO | ITIO | T | T |   |    |   |   |   |
| IP  | T | T  | R   | I    | T | CO | ITIO | T  | T    |   |   |   |    |   |   |   |

# Process Conditions

| Type             | Capacity     | Efficiency | Temperature | Class     |
| ---------------- | ------------ | ---------- | ----------- | --------- |
| Downflow         | 80,000 tu/h  | 2.70       | 85 F/52 F   | (Class 2) |
| Downflow         | 80,000 tu/h  | 2.58       |             |           |
| Downflow         | 25,000 tu/h  | 2.36       |             |           |
| Upflow ducted    | 80,000 tu/h  | 2.67       | 85 F/52 F   | (Class 2) |
| Upflow ducted    | 80,000 tu/h  | 2.55       |             |           |
| Upflow nonducted | 65,000 tu/h  | 2.16       | 75 F/52 F   | (Class 1) |
| Upflow nonducted | 240,000 tu/h | 1.8        |             |           |
| Horizontal       | 65,000 tu/h  | 2.65       | 85 F/52 F   | (Class 1) |
| Horizontal       | 240,000 tu/h | 2.47       |             |           |
| Air cooled       | 80,000 tu/h  | 2.70       | 85 F/52 F   | (Class 1) |
| Air cooled       | 25,000 tu/h  | 2.36       |             |           |

# Water Cooled

| Type             | Flow Rate     | Efficiency | Temperature | Class     |
| ---------------- | ------------- | ---------- | ----------- | --------- |
| Upflow ducted    | 80,000 tu/h   | 2.67       |             |           |
|                  | 80,000 tu/h   | 2.55       |             |           |
|                  | 25,000 tu/h   | 2.33       |             |           |
|                  | 65,000 tu/h   | 2.0        |             |           |
| Upflow nonducted | 65,000 tu/h   | 2.65       | 75 F/52 F   | (Class 1) |
|                  | 240,000 tu/h  | 1.81       |             |           |
|                  | 65,000 tu/h   | 2.55       |             |           |
|                  | 240,000 tu/h  | 2.47       | 85 F/52 F   | (Class 3) |
| Downflow         | 80,000 tu/h   | 2.82       |             |           |
|                  | 80,000 tu/h   | 2.73       |             |           |
|                  | 25,000 tu/h   | 2.67       | 85 F/52 F   | (Class 1) |
| Water cooled     | Upflow ducted | 2.70       |             |           |
|                  | 25,000 tu/h   | 2.64       |             |           |
|                  | 65,000 tu/h   | 2.43       |             |           |
| Upflow nonducted | 65,000 tu/h   | 2.32       | 75 F/52 F   | (Class 1) |
|                  | 240,000 tu/h  | 2.20       |             |           |

# Cooling System Performance Data

| Flow Type                          | Flow Rate    | Efficiency | Temperature | Class     |
| ---------------------------------- | ------------ | ---------- | ----------- | --------- |
| Horizontal                         | 65,000 tu/h  | 2.7        | 5 F/52 F    | (Class 3) |
|                                    | 240,000 tu/h | 2.60       |             |           |
| Downflow                           | 80,000 tu/h  | 2.77       |             |           |
|                                    | 25,000 tu/h  | 2.61       | 85 F/52 F   | (Class 1) |
|                                    | 80,000 tu/h  | 2.74       |             |           |
| Upflow ducted                      | 25,000 tu/h  | 2.65       |             |           |
|                                    | 25,000 tu/h  | 2.58       |             |           |
| Water cooled with fluid economizer | 65,000 tu/h  | 2.35       |             |           |
|                                    | 65,000 tu/h  |            |             |           |
| Upflow nonducted                   | 240,000 tu/h | 2.24       | 75 F/52 F   | (Class 1) |
|                                    | 240,000 tu/h | 2.12       |             |           |
|                                    | 65,000 tu/h  | 2.71       |             |           |
| Horizontal                         | 240,000 tu/h | 2.60       | 5 F/52 F    | (Class 3) |
|                                    | 240,000 tu/h | 2.54       |             |           |
| Downflow                           | 80,000 tu/h  | 2.56       |             |           |
| Glycol cooled                      | 25,000 tu/h  |            | 85 F/52 F   | (Class 1) |
|                                    | 25,000 tu/h  | 2.21       |             |           |
| Upflow ducted                      | 80,000 tu/h  | 2.53       |             |           |

| 80,000 tu/h   | and              | 2.21       |           |           |           |
| ------------- | ---------------- | ---------- | --------- | --------- | --------- |
| 2 5,000 tu/h  |                  | 2.18       |           |           |           |
| 65,000 tu/h   |                  | 2.08       |           |           |           |
| 65,000 tu/h   | Upflow,          | and        | 1.0       | 75 F/52 F | (Class 1) |
| 240,000 tu/h  |                  | 1.81       |           |           |           |
| 65,000 tu/h   |                  | 2.48       |           |           |           |
| 65,000 tu/h   | Horizontal       | and        | 2.18      | 5 F/52 F  | (Class 3) |
| 240,000 tu/h  |                  | 2.18       |           |           |           |
| 80,000 tu/h   |                  | 2.51       |           |           |           |
| 80,000 tu/h   | Downflow         | and        | 2.1       |           |           |
| 2 5,000 tu/h  | 2.15             | 85 F/52 F  | (Class 1) |           |           |
| 80,000 tu/h   |                  | 2.48       |           |           |           |
| 80,000 tu/h   | Upflow ducted    | and        | 2.16      |           |           |
| Glycol cooled | with fluid       | economizer |           |           |           |
| 2 5,000 tu/h  |                  | 2.12       |           |           |           |
| 65,000 tu/h   |                  | 2.00       |           |           |           |
| 65,000 tu/h   | Upflow nonducted | and        | 1.82      | 75 F/52 F | (Class 1) |
| 240,000 tu/h  |                  | 1.73       |           |           |           |
| Horizontal    | 65,000 tu/h      | 2.44       | 5 F/52 F  | (Class 3) |           |

65,000 tu/h and 2.10

240,000 tu/h

240,000 2.10 tu/h

For SI: 1 British thermal unit per hour 0.231 W, C (F) 32 /1.8, COP (tu/h hp)/(2,550.7).

a. C contains a complete specification of the referenced standards, which include test procedures, including the reference year version of the test procedure.

b. This table is a replica of HR Table 6.8.1-10 Floor-mounted Air Conditioners and Condensing Units Serving Computer Rooms Minimum Efficiency Requirements.
# Current Page

| T                                                                 | C                              |     |    |
| ----------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------ | --- | -- |
| POR CO PR IO                                                      | I OOR POO H I I I R I I ICI CY |     |    |
| R IR T                                                            | IP T TYP                       |     |    |
| C T GORY OR I I T T                                               | R TI G CO ITIO ICI CY PROC R   |     |    |
| Single package indoor (with or without economizer)                | Rating Conditions: A or C      | 3.5 | RE |
| Single package indoor water cooled (with or without economizer)   | Rating Conditions: A or C      | 3.5 | RE |
| Single package indoor air cooled (with Rating Conditions: A or C) |                                | 3.5 | RE |
| Split system indoor air cooled (with or without economizer)       | Rating Conditions: A or C      | 3.5 | RE |

a. C contains a complete specification of the referenced standards, which include test procedures, including the reference year version of the test procedure.

b. This table is a replica of HR Table 6.8.1-12 Vapor-Compression-based Indoor Pool Dehumidifiers Minimum Efficiency Requirements.
# Table of Energy Efficiency Ratings

| Air cooled (dehumidification mode)             | 4.0 IS RE HRI                 |               |
| ---------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------- | ------------- |
| Air-source heat pumps (dehumidification mode)  | 4.0 IS RE HRI                 |               |
| Water cooled (dehumidification mode)           | Cooling tower condenser water | 4.0 IS RE HRI |
| Chilled water                                  | 6.0 IS RE HRI                 |               |
| Air-source heat pump (heating mode)            | 2.7 ISCOP HRI                 |               |
| Ground source, closed loop                     | 4.8 IS RE HRI                 |               |
| Water-source heat pump (dehumidification mode) | Ground-water source           | 5.0 IS RE HRI |
| Water source                                   | 4.0 IS RE HRI                 |               |
| Ground source, closed loop                     | 2.0 ISCOP                     |               |
| Water-source heat pump (heating mode)          | Ground-water source           | 3.2 ISCOP HRI |
| Water source                                   | 3.5 ISCOP                     |               |

a. C contains a complete specification of the referenced standards, which include test procedures, including the reference year version of the test procedure.

b. This table is a replica of HR Table 6.8.1-13 Electrically Operated D -DOAS Units, Single-Package and Remote Condenser, without Energy Recovery Minimum Efficiency Requirements.
# Table of Contents

# 1.0 Introduction

# 2.0 Definitions

# 3.0 Standards

# 4.0 Equipment Types

# 4.1 Air Cooled

| Air cooled (dehumidification mode)             | 5.2 IS RE HRI |
| ---------------------------------------------- | ------------- |
| Air-source heat pumps (dehumidification mode)  | 5.2 IS RE HRI |
| Water cooled (dehumidification mode)           | 5.3 IS RE HRI |
| Chilled water                                  | 6.6 IS RE HRI |
| Air-source heat pump (heating mode)            | 3.3 ISCOP HRI |
| Ground source, closed loop                     | 5.2 IS RE HRI |
| Water-source heat pump (dehumidification mode) | 5.8 IS RE HRI |
| Ground-water source                            | 4.8 IS RE HRI |
| Water-source heat pump (heating mode)          | 4.0 ISCOP HRI |
| Ground-water source                            | 4.8 ISCOP HRI |

# 5.0 Footnotes

a. C contains a complete specification of the referenced standards, which include test procedures, including the reference year version of the test procedure.

b. This table is a replica of HR Table 6.8.1-14 Electrically Operated D -DOAS Units, Single-Package and Remote Condenser, with Energy Recovery Minimum Efficiency Requirements.
# Current Page

| Type                                        | Category | Cooling Capacity | Entering Water Temperature | EER/COPH |
| ------------------------------------------- | -------- | ---------------- | -------------------------- | -------- |
| Water-to-air, water loop (cooling mode)     | All      | 17,000 tu/h      | 86 F                       | 12.2 EER |
| Water-to-air, water loop (cooling mode)     | All      | 65,000 tu/h      | 86 F                       | 13.0 EER |
| Water-to-air, ground water (cooling mode)   | All      | 135,000 tu/h     | 5 F                        | 18.0 EER |
| Water-to-air, ground loop (cooling mode)    | All      | 135,000 tu/h     | 77 F                       | 14.1 EER |
| Water-to-water, water loop (cooling mode)   | All      | 135,000 tu/h     | 86 F                       | 10.6 EER |
| Water-to-water, ground water (cooling mode) | All      | 135,000 tu/h     | 5 F                        | 16.3 EER |
| Water-to-water, ground loop (cooling mode)  | All      | 135,000 tu/h     | 77 F                       | 12.1 EER |
| Water-to-water, water loop (heating mode)   |          | 135,000 tu/h     | 68 F                       | 4.3 COPH |
| Water-to-air, ground water (heating mode)   |          | 135,000 tu/h     | 50 F                       | 3.7 COPH |
| Water-to-air, ground loop (heating mode)    |          | 135,000 tu/h     | 32 F                       | 3.2 COPH |

# Water-to-water Heat Pumps

| Type                                        | Capacity (tu/h) | Entering Water Temp (°F) | COPH | Cooling Water Capacity |
| ------------------------------------------- | --------------- | ------------------------ | ---- | ---------------------- |
| Water-to-water, water loop (heating mode)   | 135,000         | 68                       | 3.7  | I O                    |
| Water-to-water, ground water (heating mode) | 135,000         | 50                       | 3.1  | I O                    |
| Water-to-water, ground loop (heating mode)  | 135,000         | 32                       | 2.5  | I O                    |

For SI: 1 British thermal unit per hour = 0.2931 W, °C (°F) = 32/1.8.

a. C contains a complete specification of the referenced standards, which include test procedures, including the reference year version of the test procedure.

b. Single-phase, US air-cooled heat pumps less than 1 kW are regulated as consumer products by O C R. SCOPC, SCOP2C, SCOPH and SCOP2H values for single-phase products are set by the USDOE.

c. This table is a replica of HR Table 6.8.1-15 Electrically Operated Water-Source Heat Pumps Minimum Efficiency Requirements.
| T C             |             | H T P P      |        | H T R CO RY CHI R P C G I I ICI CY R IR T |            |
| --------------- | ----------- | ------------ | ------ | ----------------------------------------- | ---------- |
| H TI G OP R TIO |             | COO I G      |        | H T R CO RY CHI R                         |            |
| O Y             |             | OP R TIO     |        | H T P P H TI G                            |            |
| COPHR           |             | COO I G      |        | H TI G O ICI CY                           |            |
| IR O RC         |             | CO ITIO      |        | ICI CY COP HC                             |            |
| IP T            | I R         | TYP C T GORY | H      | H                                         | P          |
| R T R           |             | OR T         | O RC   | O T                                       | PO R I P T |
| P R             | C P CITY    | IP           | P      | P                                         | .5 5 .215  |
| FL              | FL          | 47 dbₑ       | 2.770  | NA                                        | NA         |
| 13.02           | 15.01       | 43 wb        | 3.2 0  | 2.310                                     | Air source |
| All si es       | IPLV.IP     | IPLV.IP      | HRI    | .5 5 .215                                 | FL         |
| FL              | 17 db       | 1. 50        | NA     | NA                                        | NA         |
| 13.30           | 15.30       | 15 wbᵉ       | 2.230  | 1.630                                     | IPLV.IP    |
| 54/44ᶠ          |             | 3.680        | NA     | 6.410                                     | NA         |
| 0.7885          | 0.7875      | 4.640        | 2.680  | 8.330                                     | 4.420      |
| 75              | FL          | FL           | 75/65ᶠ | NA                                        | NA         |
| NA              | NA          | NA           | 6.150  | 0.6316                                    | 0.5145     |
| IPLV.IP         | IPLV.IP     | 54/44ᶠ       | 3.680  | NA                                        | 6.410      |
| NA              | 0.757       | 0.7140       | 4.640  | 2.680                                     | 8.330      |
| 4.420           | 75 and 150  | FL           | FL     | 75/65ᶠ                                    | NA         |
| NA              | NA          | NA           | 6.150  | 0.58 5                                    | 0.4620     |
| IPLV.IP         | IPLV.IP     | 54/44ᶠ       | 3.680  | NA                                        | 6.410      |
| NA              | 0.6421      | 0.6563       | 4.30   | 2.70                                      | 8.00       |
| 5.000           | 300 and 600 | FL           | FL     | 75/65ᶠ                                    | NA         |
| NA              | NA          | NA           | 6.850  | 0.5474                                    | 0.4305     |
| IPLV.IP         | IPLV.IP     | 54/44ᶠ       | 3.60   | NA                                        | 6.80       |
| NA              | 0.58 5      | 0.6143       | 4.30   | 2.70                                      | 8.00       |
| 5.000           | 600         | FL           | FL     | 75/65ᶠ                                    | NA         |
| NA              | NA          | NA           | 6.850  | 0.5263                                    | 0.3 0      |
| 3.00            | IPLV.IP     | IPLV.IP      | 54/44ᶠ | 3.680                                     | NA         |
| 6.410           | NA          | 0.6421       | 0.7316 | 4.640                                     | 2.680      |
| 8.330           | 4.420       | 75           | FL     | FL                                        | 75/65ᶠ     |
| NA              | NA          | NA           | NA     | NA                                        | 6.150      |
| 0.578           | 0.4632      | 3.550        | HRI    |                                           |            |

|        | 54/44ᶠ | 3.680 | NA    | 6.410 | NA    |       |
| ------ | ------ | ----- | ----- | ----- | ----- | ----- |
| 0.58 5 | 0.6684 | 4.640 | 2.680 | 8.330 | 4.420 |       |
| 150    | 75/65ᶠ | NA    | NA    | NA    | NA    | NA    |
| 0.5474 | 0.4211 |       | 3.550 |       |       | 6.150 |
| 300    | 75/65ᶠ | NA    | NA    | NA    | NA    | NA    |
| 0.5263 | 0.4105 |       | 3.550 |       |       | 6.150 |
| 600    | 75/65ᶠ | NA    | NA    | NA    | NA    | NA    |
| 0.5263 | 0.4000 |       | 3.00  |       |       | 6.850 |

For SI: C (F) 32 /1.8.

1. C contains a complete specification of the referenced standards, which include test procedures, including the reference year version of the test procedure.
2. Cooling-only rating conditions are standard rating conditions defined in HRI, Table 1.
3. Heating full-load rating conditions are at rating conditions defined in HRI, Table 1.
4. For water-cooled heat recovery chillers that have capabilities for heat reflection to a heat recovery condenser and a tower condenser, the COPHR applies to operation at full load with 100 percent heat recovery (no tower reflection). Units that only have capabilities for partial heat recovery shall meet the requirements of T C.
5. Outdoor air entering dry-bulb (db) temperature and wet-bulb (wb) temperature.
6. Source-water entering and leaving water temperature.
7. This table is a replica of HR Table 6.8.1-16 Heat-Pump and Heat Recovery Chiller Packages Minimum Efficiency Requirements.
# Current Conditions

# Cooling Type

| Ducted                                       | 2,000 tu/h | 2.05 | 65,000 tu/h             | 1.2  |
| -------------------------------------------- | ---------- | ---- | ----------------------- | ---- |
| Air cooled with free air discharge condenser | 2,000 tu/h | 2.08 | 75 F/52 F HRI (Class 1) |      |
| Nonducted                                    | 2,000 tu/h | 2.05 | 65,000 tu/h             | 1.4  |
| Air cooled with free air discharge condenser | 2,000 tu/h | 2.01 | 75 F/52 F HRI (Class 1) |      |
| Ducted                                       | 2,000 tu/h | 1.7  | 65,000 tu/h             | 1.87 |
| Air cooled with ducted condenser             | 2,000 tu/h | 1.86 | 75 F/52 F HRI (Class 1) |      |

| 2,000                                                 | tu/h      | 1.83 |      |
| ----------------------------------------------------- | --------- | ---- | ---- |
| 65,000                                                | tu/h      | 1.73 |      |
| 2,000                                                 | tu/h      | 1.8  |      |
| 2,000                                                 | Nonducted | tu/h | 1.86 |
| 65,000                                                | tu/h      | 1.75 |      |
| 2,000                                                 | tu/h      | 1.82 |      |
| 2,000                                                 | Ducted    | tu/h | 1.78 |
| 65,000                                                | tu/h      |      |      |
| Air cooled with fluid economizer and ducted condenser | 65,000    | 1.68 |      |
| 2,000                                                 | tu/h      | 1.85 |      |
| 2,000                                                 | Nonducted | tu/h | 1.81 |
| 65,000                                                | tu/h      | 1.70 |      |
| 2,000                                                 | tu/h      | 2.38 |      |
| 2,000                                                 | Ducted    | tu/h | 2.28 |
| 65,000                                                | tu/h      | 2.18 |      |
| Water cooled                                          | 65,000    | 2.41 |      |
| 2,000                                                 | tu/h      |      |      |
| 2,000                                                 | Nonducted | tu/h | 2.31 |
| 65,000                                                | tu/h      |      |      |

# Cooling System Performance Data

| Type                                       | Flow Rate   | HRI  |
| ------------------------------------------ | ----------- | ---- |
| Ducted Water cooled with fluid economizer  | 65,000 tu/h | 2.20 |
|                                            | 2,000 tu/h  | 2.33 |
|                                            | 2,000 tu/h  | 2.36 |
| Nonducted                                  | 65,000 tu/h | 2.26 |
|                                            | 2,000 tu/h  | 1.7  |
| Ducted Glycol cooled                       | 65,000 tu/h | 1.3  |
|                                            | 2,000 tu/h  | 2.00 |
| Nonducted                                  | 65,000 tu/h | 1.8  |
|                                            | 2,000 tu/h  | 1.81 |
| Ducted Glycol cooled with fluid economizer | 65,000 tu/h | 1.88 |
|                                            | 2,000 tu/h  | 1.5  |

# 2,000 tu/h and 1.3

# 65,000 tu/h

# 65,000 1.76 tu/h

For SI: 1 British thermal unit per hour 0.231 W, (C) (F) 32 /1.8, COP (tu/h hp)/(2,550.7).

1. C contains a complete specification of the referenced standards, which include test procedures, including the reference year version of the test procedure.
2. This is a replica of HR Table 6.8.1-17 Ceiling-mounted Computer-Room Air Conditioners Minimum Efficiency Requirements.

C C Equipment not designed for operation at AHRI Standard 550/590 test conditions of 44.00 F leaving and 54.00 F entering chilled-fluid temperatures, and with 85.00 F entering and 4.30 F leaving condenser-fluid temperatures, shall have maximum full-load kW/ton (FL) and part-load rating requirements adjusted using the following equations:

where:

- ad: Full-load kW/ton value from Table C403.3.2(3).
- ad: Maximum full-load kW/ton rating, adjusted for nonstandard conditions.
- I: I I I I value from Table C403.3.2(3).
- ad: Maximum rating, adjusted for nonstandard conditions.

0.000000145 2 (I)⁴ 0.00003464 6 (I)³ 0.003141 6 (I)² 0.1471 (I) 3.3073

0.0015 vgEva 0.34

I vgCond vgEva

vgCond: Full-load condenser leaving fluid temperature (F).

vgEva: Full-load evaporator leaving temperature (F).

The ad and ad values are applicable only for centrifugal chillers meeting all of the following full-load design ranges:

- 36.00 F vgEva 60.00 F
- vgCond 115.00 F
- 20.00 F I 80.00 F

Manufacturers shall calculate the ad and ad before determining whether to label the chiller. Centrifugal chillers designed to operate outside of these ranges are not covered by this code.
Equipment with a leaving fluid temperature higher than 32 F (0 C) and water-cooled positive displacement chilling packages with a condenser leaving fluid temperature below 115 F (46 C) shall meet the requirements of the tables in C when tested or certified with water at standard rating conditions, in accordance with the referenced test procedure.

# C H

Cooling systems shall not use hot gas bypass or other evaporator pressure control systems unless the system is designed with multiple steps of unloading or continuous capacity modulation. The capacity of the hot gas bypass shall be limited as indicated in T C, as limited by C.
# Boiler Systems Compliance

Boiler Systems shall comply with the following:

1. Combustion air positive shut-off shall be provided on all newly installed boiler systems as follows:
1. All boiler systems with an input capacity of 2,500,000 tu/h (732 kW) and above, in which the boiler is designed to operate with a nonpositive vent static pressure.
2. All boiler systems where one stack serves two or more boilers with a total combined input capacity per stack of 2,500,000 tu/h (732 kW).
2. Boiler system combustion air fans with motors 10 horsepower (7.46 kW) or larger shall meet one of the following for newly installed boilers:
1. The fan motor shall be variable speed, or
2. The fan motor shall include controls that limit the fan motor demand to no more than 30 percent of the total design wattage at 50 percent of design air volume.

Newly installed boilers with an input capacity of 5,000,000 tu/h (1465 kW) and steady state full-load less than 0 percent shall maintain stack-gas oxygen concentrations not greater than the values specified in Table C403.3.4.1. Combustion air volume shall be controlled with respect to measured flue gas oxygen concentration. The use of a common gas and combustion air control linkage or rack shaft is prohibited.
# Boiler System Application

10% of the boiler system capacity is used for process applications at design conditions.

# Process boilers

a. Concentration levels measured by volume on a dry basis over firing rates of 20 to 100 percent.

These concentration limits do not apply if 50 percent or more of the boiler system capacity serves Group R-2 occupancies.

Boiler systems with design input of greater than 1,000,000 BTU/h (293 kW) shall comply with the turndown ratio specified in T C.

The system turndown requirement shall be met through the use of multiple single-input boilers, one or more modulating boilers or a combination of single-input and modulating boilers.
# Heating and Cooling Systems

|                          | T  | C |        |   |   |
| ------------------------ | -- | - | ------ | - | - |
|                          | OI | R | T      | R | O |
| 1,000,000 and 5,000,000  |    |   | 3 to 1 |   |   |
| 5,000,000 and 10,000,000 |    |   | 4 to 1 |   |   |
| 10,000,000               |    |   | 5 to 1 |   |   |

For SI: 1 British thermal unit per hour = 0.2931 W.

# Controls

Heating and cooling system shall be provided with controls in accordance with C through C403.4.8.

# Thermostatic Controls

The supply of heating and cooling energy to each one shall be controlled by individual thermostatic controls capable of responding to temperature within the one. Where humidification or dehumidification or both is provided, not fewer than one humidity control device shall be provided for each humidity control system.

# Independent Perimeter Systems

Independent perimeter systems that are designed to offset only building envelope heat losses, gains or both serving one or more perimeter ones also served by an interior system provided that both of the following conditions are met:

1. The perimeter system includes not fewer than one thermostatic control one for each building exposure having exterior walls facing only one orientation (within 45 degrees) (0.8 rad) for more than 50 contiguous feet (15 240 mm).
2. The perimeter system heating and cooling supply is controlled by thermostats located within the ones served by the system.

# Heat Pumps

Heat pumps having supplementary electric resistance heat shall have controls that limit supplemental heat operation to only those times when one of the following applies:

1. The vapor compression cycle cannot provide the necessary heating energy to satisfy the thermostat setting.
2. The heat pump is operating in defrost mode.
3. The vapor compression cycle malfunctions.
4. The thermostat malfunctions.

# Temperature Control

Where used to control both heating and cooling, one thermostatic controls shall be configured to provide a temperature range or deadband of not less than 5°F (2.8°C) within which the supply of heating and cooling energy to the one is shut off or reduced to a minimum.
# 1. Thermostats requiring manual changeover between heating and cooling modes.

# 2. Occupancies or applications requiring precision in indoor temperature control as approved by the code of official.

Where a zone has a separate heating and a separate cooling thermostatic control located within the zone, a limit switch, mechanical stop or direct digital control system with software programming shall be configured to prevent the heating setpoint from exceeding the cooling setpoint and to maintain a deadband in accordance with C C H C H.

The heating system for heated vestibules and air curtains with integral heating shall be provided with controls configured to shut off the source of heating when the outdoor air temperature is greater than 45 F (7 C). Vestibule heating and cooling systems shall be controlled by a thermostat located in the vestibule configured to limit heating to a temperature not greater than 60 F (16 C) and cooling to a temperature not less than 85 F (29 C).

Control of heating or cooling provided by site-recovered energy or transfer air that would otherwise be exhausted.

Hot water boilers that supply heat to the building through one- or two-pipe heating systems shall have an outdoor setback control that lowers the boiler water temperature based on the outdoor temperature.

Each zone shall be provided with thermostatic setback controls that are controlled by either an automatic time clock or programmable control system.

1. zones that will be operated continuously.
2. zones with a full HVAC load demand not exceeding 6,800 BTU/h (2 kW) and having a manual shutoff switch located with ready access.

Thermostatic setback controls shall be configured to set back or temporarily operate the system to maintain zone temperatures down to 55 F (13 C) or up to 85 F (29 C).
Automatic time clock or programmable controls shall be capable of starting and stopping the system for seven different daily schedules per week and retaining their programming and time setting during a loss of power for not fewer than 10 hours. Additionally, the controls shall have a manual override that allows temporary operation of the system for up to 2 hours, a manually operated timer configured to operate the system for up to 2 hours, or an occupancy sensor.

# Optimum Start and Stop Controls

Optimum start and stop controls shall be provided for each HVAC system with direct control of individual ones. The optimum start controls shall be configured to automatically adjust the daily start time of the HVAC system in order to bring each space to the desired occupied temperature immediately prior to scheduled occupancy. The optimum stop controls shall be configured to reduce the HVAC system's heating temperature setpoint and increase the cooling temperature setpoint by not less than 2°F (1.11°C) before scheduled unoccupied periods based on the thermal lag and acceptable drift in space temperature that is within comfort limits. Dwelling units and sleeping units are not required to have optimum start controls.

# Heating and Cooling Systems

The heating of fluids that have been previously mechanically cooled and the cooling of fluids that have been previously mechanically heated shall be limited in accordance with C through C. Hydronic heating systems comprised of multiple-packaged boilers and designed to deliver conditioned water or steam into a common distribution system shall include automatic controls configured to sequence operation of the boilers. Hydronic heating systems composed of a single boiler and greater than 500,000 BTU/h (146.5 kW) input design capacity shall include either a multistaged or modulating burner.

# Common Return Systems

Hydronic systems that use a common return system for both hot water and chilled water are prohibited.

# Common Distribution Systems

Systems that use a common distribution system to supply both heated and chilled water shall be designed to allow a deadband between changeover from one mode to the other of not less than 15°F (8.3°C) outside air temperatures, be designed to and provided with controls that will allow operation in one mode for not less than 4 hours before changing over to the other mode, and be provided with controls that allow heating and cooling supply temperatures at the changeover point to be not more than 30°F (16.7°C) apart.
# Hydronic heat pump systems

Hydronic heat pumps connected to a common heat pump water loop with central devices for heat rejection and heat addition shall have controls that are configured to provide a heat pump water supply temperature deadband of not less than 20 F (11 C) between initiation of heat rejection and heat addition by the central devices.

Where a system loop temperature optimization controller is installed and can determine the most efficient operating temperature based on real-time conditions of demand and capacity, deadbands of less than 20 F (11 C) shall be permitted.

# The following shall apply to hydronic water loop heat pump systems in Climate Zones 3 through 8:

1. Where a closed-circuit cooling tower is used directly in the heat pump loop, either an automatic valve shall be installed to bypass the flow of water around the closed-circuit cooling tower, except for any flow necessary for freeze protection, or low-leakage positive-closure dampers shall be provided.
2. Where an open-circuit cooling tower is used directly in the heat pump loop, an automatic valve shall be installed to bypass all heat pump water flow around the open-circuit cooling tower.
3. Where an open-circuit or closed-circuit cooling tower is used in conjunction with a separate heat exchanger to isolate the open-circuit cooling tower from the heat pump loop, heat loss shall be controlled by shutting down the circulation pump on the cooling tower loop.

Where it can be demonstrated that a heat pump system will be required to reject heat throughout the year.

# Each hydronic heat pump on the hydronic system having a total pump system power exceeding 10 hp (7.5 kW) shall have a two-position automatic valve interlocked to shut off the water flow when the compressor is off.

# Hydronic systems greater than or equal to 300,000 BTU/h (87.5 kW) in design output capacity supplying heated or chilled water to comfort conditioning systems shall include controls that are configured to do all of the following:
1. Automatically reset the supply-water temperatures in response to varying building heating and cooling demand using coil valve position, one-return water temperature, building-return water temperature or outside air temperature. The temperature shall be reset by not less than 25 percent of the design supply-to-return water temperature difference.
2. Automatically vary fluid flow for hydronic systems with a combined pump motor capacity of 2 hp (1.5 kW) or larger with three or more control valves or other devices by reducing the system design flow rate by not less than 50 percent or the maximum reduction allowed by the equipment manufacturer for proper operation of equipment by valves that modulate or step open and close, or pumps that modulate or turn on and off as a function of load.
3. Automatically vary pump flow on heating-water systems, chilled-water systems and heat reflection loops serving water-cooled unitary air conditioners as follows:
1. Where pumps operate continuously or operate based on a time schedule, pumps with nominal output motor power of 2 hp or more shall have a variable speed drive.
2. Where pumps have automatic direct digital control configured to operate pumps only when one heating or cooling is required, a variable speed drive shall be provided for pumps with motors having the same or greater nominal output power indicated in T C based on the climate zone and system served.
4. Where a variable speed drive is required by Item 3 of this section, pump motor power input shall be not more than 30 percent of design wattage at 50 percent of the design water flow. Pump flow shall be controlled to maintain one control valve nearly wide open or to satisfy the minimum differential pressure.
1. Supply-water temperature reset is not required for chilled-water systems supplied by off-site district chilled water or chilled water from ice storage systems.
2. Variable pump flow is not required on dedicated coil circulation pumps where needed for freeze protection.
3. Variable pump flow is not required on dedicated equipment circulation pumps where configured in primary/secondary design to provide the minimum flow requirements of the equipment manufacturer for proper operation of equipment.
4. Variable speed drives are not required on heating water pumps where more than 50 percent of annual heat is generated by an electric boiler.
# Current Page

|     | T    | C   |    |    |    |        |    |     |    |    |   |   |
| --- | ---- | --- | -- | -- | -- | ------ | -- | --- | -- | -- | - | - |
| RI  | P    | RI  | R  | IR | T  | OR     | CO | TRO | P  | P  |   |   |
| CHI | TR   | H   | T  | H  | TI | G      | TR | R   | IR | OR |   |   |
| R   | CTIO | OOP | P  | P  | I  | TH     | P  | P   | I  | TH |   |   |
|     |      | OT  | OR | I  | TH | R      | T  | O   | O  | TP | T | O |
| 0A  | 0    | 1A  | 1  | 2  |    | 2 hp   |    |     |    |    |   |   |
| 2A  | 3    |     |    |    |    | 3 hp   |    |     |    |    |   |   |
| 3A  | 3C   | 4A  | 4  | 7  | 8  | 5 hp   |    |     |    |    |   |   |
| 4C  | 5A   | 5   | 5C | 6A | 6  | 7.5 hp |    |     |    |    |   |   |
|     | 4A   | 4C  | 5  |    |    | 10 hp  |    |     |    |    |   |   |
| 7   | 8    | 4   |    |    |    | 15 hp  |    |     |    |    |   |   |
|     | 2A   | 2   | 3A | 3  |    | 25 hp  |    |     |    |    |   |   |
|     | 0    | 1   |    |    |    | 100 hp |    |     |    |    |   |   |
|     | 0A   | 1A  |    |    |    | 200 hp |    |     |    |    |   |   |

For SI: 1 hp = 0.746 kW.

Chilled water plants including more than one chiller shall be capable of and configured to reduce flow automatically through the chiller plant when a chiller is shut down. Chillers piped in series for the purpose of increased temperature differential shall be considered as one chiller.

Boiler systems including more than one boiler shall be capable of and configured to reduce flow automatically through the boiler system when a boiler is shut down.

Buildings shall be provided with demand responsive controls capable of executing the following actions in response to a demand response signal:

1. Automatically increasing the one operating cooling set point by the following values: 1 F (0.5 C), 2 F (1 C), 3 F (1.5 C), and 4 F (2 C).
2. Automatically decreasing the one operating heating set point by the following values: 1 F (0.5 C), 2 F (1 C), 3 F (1.5 C), and 4 F (2 C).

Where a demand response signal is not available the heating and cooling system controls shall be capable of performing all other functions. Where thermostats are controlled by direct digital control including, but not limited to, an energy management system, the system shall be capable of demand responsive control and capable of adjusting all thermal set-points to comply. The demand responsive controls shall comply with either Section C403.4.6.1 or Section C403.4.6.2

1. Group I occupancies
2. Group H occupancies
# 3. Controls serving data center systems

# 4. Occupancies or applications requiring precision in indoor temperature control as approved by the code official

# 5. Controls that serve only fossil fuel equipment

Thermostats for Air conditioners and heat pumps with two or more stages of control and a cooling capacity less than 65,000 BTU/h (1 kW) shall be provided with a demand responsive control that complies with the communication and performance requirements of AHRI 1380.

Thermostats for HVAC systems shall be provided with a demand responsive control that complies with one of the following:

1. Certified OpenADR 2.0a VEN, as specified under Clause 11, Conformance
2. Certified OpenADR 2.0b VEN, as specified under Clause 11, Conformance
3. Certified by the manufacturer as being capable of responding to a demand response signal from a certified OpenADR 2.0b VEN by automatically implementing the control functions requested by the VEN for the equipment it controls
4. IEC 62746-10-1
5. The communication protocol required by a controlling entity, such as a utility or service provider, to participate in an automated demand response program
6. The physical configuration and communication protocol of CTA 2045-A or CTA 2045-B.

All doors from a conditioned space to the outdoors and all other operable openings from a conditioned space to the outdoors that are larger than 40 square feet (3.7 m²) when fully open, shall have automatic controls interlocked with the heating and cooling system. The controls shall be configured to do the following within 5 minutes of opening:

1. Disable mechanical heating to the zone or reset the space heating temperature setpoint to 55°F (12.7°C) or less.
2. Disable mechanical cooling to the zone or reset the space cooling temperature setpoint to 70°F (32°C) or more. Mechanical cooling can remain enabled if the outdoor air temperature is below the space temperature.

1. Building entrances with automatic closing devices.

2. Emergency exits with an automatic alarm that sounds when open.

3. Operable openings and doors serving enclosed spaces without a thermostat or HVAC temperature sensor.

4. Separately zoned areas associated with the preparation of food that contain appliances that contribute to the HVAC loads of a restaurant or similar type of occupancy.
# 5.

Warehouses that utilize operable openings for the function of the occupancy where approved by the code official.

# 6.

The first entrance doors where located in the exterior wall and are part of a vestibule system.

# 7.

Operable openings into spaces served by radiant heating and cooling systems.

# 8.

Alterations where walls would have to be opened solely for the purpose of meeting this requirement and where approved.

# .

Doors served by air curtains meeting the requirements of Section C402.6.6.

# C

# C

Humidification and dehumidification controls shall be in accordance with this section.

# C

# C

Humidistatic controls shall not use mechanical cooling to reduce the humidity below the lower of a dew point of 55°F for relative humidity of 60 percent in the coldest zone served by the system. Lower humidity shall be permitted where mechanical cooling is being used for temperature control.

# 1.

Where approved, systems serving zones where specific humidity levels are required, such as museums and hospitals, and where humidistatic controls are capable of and configured to maintain a dead band of at least 10 percent relative humidity where no active humidification or dehumidification takes place.

# 2.

Systems serving zones where humidity levels are required to be maintained with precision of not more than 5 percent relative humidity to comply with applicable codes or accreditation standards or as approved by the authority having jurisdiction.

# C

# C

Humidistatic controls shall not use fossil fuels or electricity to produce relative humidity above 30 percent in the warmest zone served by the system.

# 1.

Where approved, systems serving zones where specific humidity levels are required, such as museums and hospitals, and where humidistatic controls are capable of and configured to maintain a dead band of at least 10 percent relative humidity where no active humidification or dehumidification takes place.

# 2.

Systems serving zones where humidity levels are required to be maintained with precision of not more than 5 percent relative humidity to comply with applicable codes or accreditation standards or as approved by the authority having jurisdiction.
Where a one is served by a system or systems with both humidification and dehumidification capability, means such as limit switches, mechanical stops, or, for DDC systems, software programming shall be provided capable of and configured to prevent simultaneous operation of humidification and dehumidification equipment.

Systems serving ones where humidity levels are required to be maintained with precision of not more than 5 percent relative humidity to comply with applicable codes or accreditation standards or as approved by the authority having jurisdiction.

# Economizers

Economizers shall comply with C through C.

An air or water economizer shall be provided for the following cooling systems:

1. Chilled water systems with a total cooling capacity, less cooling capacity provided with air economizers, as specified in T C.
2. Individual fan systems with cooling capacity greater than or equal to 54,000 tu/h (15.8 kW) in buildings having other than a residential occupancy. The total supply capacity of all fan cooling units not provided with economizers shall not exceed 20 percent of the total supply capacity of all fan cooling units in the building or 300,000 tu/h (88 kW), whichever is greater.
3. Individual fan systems with cooling capacity greater than or equal to 270,000 tu/h (79.1 kW) in buildings having a residential occupancy. The total supply capacity of all fan cooling units not provided with economizers shall not exceed 20 percent of the total supply capacity of all fan cooling units in the building or 1,500,000 tu/h (440 kW), whichever is greater.

Economizers are not required for the following systems:

1. Individual fan systems not served by chilled water for buildings located in Climate Zones 0A, 0B, 1A and 1B.
2. Where more than 25 percent of the air designed to be supplied by the system is to spaces that are designed to be humidified above 35°F (1.7°C) dew-point temperature to satisfy process needs.
3. Systems expected to operate less than 20 hours per week.
4. Systems serving supermarket areas with open refrigerated casework.
5. Where the cooling efficiency is greater than or equal to the efficiency requirements in T C.
6. Systems that include a heat recovery system in accordance with C.
7. Direct-expansion fancoils or unitary equipment with a capacity less than 54,000 tu/h (15.8 kW) and multiple stages of compressor capacity installed with a dedicated outdoor air system.
# CHI T R Y T COO I G C P CITY OR T R I I G

# COO I G

|                        | Economi er not re uired | Economi er not re uired |
| ---------------------- | ----------------------- | ----------------------- |
| 0A, 1A                 | 60,000 tu/h             | 1,250,000 tu/h          |
| 0, 1, 2A, 2            | 720,000 tu/h            | 40,000 tu/h             |
| 3A, 3, 3C, 4A, 4, 4C   | 1,320,000 tu/h          | 1,720,000 tu/h          |
| 5A, 5, 5C, 6A, 6, 7, 8 |                         |                         |

For SI: 1 British thermal unit per hour = 0.2 31 W.
# IP T ICI CY P R OR C C PTIO OR CO O I R

| 2A, 2 | 10 | efficiency improvement |
| ----- | -- | ---------------------- |
| 3A, 3 | 15 | efficiency improvement |
| 4A, 4 | 20 | efficiency improvement |

Economi er systems shall be integrated with the mechanical cooling system and be configured to provide partial cooling even where additional mechanical cooling is required to provide the remainder of the cooling load. Controls shall not be capable of creating a false load in the mechanical cooling systems by limiting or disabling the economi er or any other means, such as hot gas bypass, except at the lowest stage of mechanical cooling.

Units that include an air economi er shall comply with the following:

1. Unit controls shall have the mechanical cooling capacity control interlocked with the air economi er controls such that the outdoor air damper is at the 100-percent open position when mechanical cooling is on and the outdoor air damper does not begin to close to prevent coil freezing due to minimum compressor run time until the leaving air temperature is less than 45 F (7 C).
2. Direct expansion (D) units that control 75,000 tu/h (22 kW) or greater of rated capacity of the capacity of the mechanical cooling directly based on occupied space temperature shall have not fewer than two stages of mechanical cooling capacity.
3. Other D units, including those that control space temperature by modulating the airflow to the space, shall be in accordance with T C.
# COO I G T G R IR T OR O TI G IR O IT

# R TI G C P CITY

| 65,000 tu/h and | 3 stages | 35 of full load |
| --------------- | -------- | --------------- |
| 240,000 tu/h    | 4 stages | 25 full load    |

For SI: 1 British thermal unit per hour = 0.2 31 W.

a. For mechanical cooling stage control that does not use variable compressor displacement, the percent displacement shall be equivalent to the mechanical cooling capacity reduction evaluated at the full load rating conditions for the compressor.

HVAC system design and economizer controls shall be such that economizer operation does not increase building heating energy use during normal operation.

Economizers on variable air volume (VAV) systems that cause one level heating to increase because of a reduction in supply air temperature.

Where economizers are required by C, air economizers shall comply with C through C.

Air economizer systems shall be configured to modulate outdoor air and return air dampers to provide up to 100 percent of the design supply air quantity as outdoor air for cooling.

Economizer controls and dampers shall be configured to sequence the dampers with the mechanical cooling equipment and shall not be controlled by only mixed-air temperature.

The use of mixed-air temperature limit control shall be permitted for systems controlled from space temperature (such as single-zone systems).

Air economizers shall be configured to automatically reduce outdoor air intake to the design minimum outdoor air quantity when outdoor air intake will not reduce cooling energy usage. High-limit shutoff control types for specific.
climates shall be chosen from T C . High-limit shutoff control settings for these control types shall be those specified in T C .
# HIGH IT H TO CO TRO TTI G OR IR CO O I R

# IC TYP

|                                                        | 0                  | 1                                         | 2                                         | 3 | 3C | 4 | 4C | 5  | 5C | 6  | 7  | 8 |   |   |
| ------------------------------------------------------ | ------------------ | ----------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------- | - | -- | - | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | - | - | - |
| 75 F Outdoor air temperature exceeds 75 F              |                    |                                           |                                           |   |    |   |    |    |    |    |    |   |   |   |
| Fixed dry bulb                                         |                    |                                           |                                           |   |    |   |    |    |    |    |    |   |   |   |
|                                                        | 5A                 | 6A                                        | 70 F Outdoor air temperature exceeds 70 F |   |    |   |    |    |    |    |    |   |   |   |
|                                                        | 0A, 1A, 2A, 3A, 4A |                                           |                                           |   |    |   |    |    |    |    |    |   |   |   |
| 65 F Outdoor air temperature exceeds 65 F              |                    |                                           |                                           |   |    |   |    |    |    |    |    |   |   |   |
| Differential dry bulb                                  |                    |                                           |                                           |   |    |   |    |    |    |    |    |   |   |   |
|                                                        | 0                  | 1                                         | 2                                         | 3 | 3C | 4 | 4C | 5A | 5  | 5C | 6A | 6 | 7 | 8 |
| Outdoor air temperature exceeds return air temperature |                    |                                           |                                           |   |    |   |    |    |    |    |    |   |   |   |
|                                                        |                    |                                           | Outdoor air enthalpy                      |   |    |   |    |    |    |    |    |   |   |   |
| Fixed enthalpy with fixed dry-bulb temperatures        |                    |                                           |                                           |   |    |   |    |    |    |    |    |   |   |   |
|                                                        | All                | 75 F Outdoor air temperature exceeds 75 F |                                           |   |    |   |    |    |    |    |    |   |   |   |
|                                                        |                    |                                           | Outdoor air enthalpy                      |   |    |   |    |    |    |    |    |   |   |   |
| Differential enthalpy with fixed dry-bulb temperature  |                    |                                           |                                           |   |    |   |    |    |    |    |    |   |   |   |
|                                                        | All                | 75 F Outdoor air temperature exceeds 75 F |                                           |   |    |   |    |    |    |    |    |   |   |   |

For SI: C (F 32)/1.8, 1 tu/lb 2.33 k/kg.

a. At altitudes substantially different than sea level, the fixed enthalpy limit shall be set to the enthalpy value at 75 F and 50-percent relative humidity. As an example, at approximately 6,000 feet elevation, the fixed enthalpy limit is approximately 30.7 tu/lb.

b. Devices with selectable setpoints shall be capable of being set to within 2 F and 2 tu/lb of the setpoint listed.

# Systems shall provide one of the following means to relieve excess outdoor air during air economizer operation to prevent overpressurizing the building.

1. Return or relief fan(s) meeting the requirements of Section C403.11.1.
2. Barometric or motorized damper relief path with a total pressure drop at design relief airflow rate less than 0.10 inches water column (25 Pa) from the occupied space to outdoors. Design relief airflow rate shall be the design supply airflow rate minus any continuous exhaust flows, such as toilet exhaust fans, whose makeup is provided by the economizer system.

The relief air outlet shall be located to avoid recirculation into the building.
Return, exhaust/relief and outdoor air dampers used in economizers shall comply with.

Where economizers are required by, water-side economizers shall comply with and.

Water economizer systems shall be configured to cool supply air by indirect evaporation and providing up to 100 percent of the expected system cooling load at outdoor air temperatures of not greater than 50 F (10 C) dry bulb/45 F (7 C) wet bulb.

1. Systems primarily serving computer rooms in which 100 percent of the expected system cooling load at 40 F (4 C) dry bulb/35 F (1.7 C) wet bulb is met with evaporative water economizers.
2. Systems primarily serving computer rooms with dry cooler water economizers that satisfy 100 percent of the expected system cooling load at 35 F (1.7 C) dry bulb.
3. Systems where dehumidification requirements cannot be met using outdoor air temperatures of 50 F (10 C) dry bulb/45 F (7 C) wet bulb and where 100 percent of the expected system cooling load at 45 F (7 C) dry bulb/40 F (4 C) wet bulb is met with evaporative water economizers.

Precooling coils and water-to-water heat exchangers used as part of a water economizer system shall either have a water-side pressure drop of less than 15 feet (45 kPa) of water or a secondary loop shall be created so that the coil or heat exchanger pressure drop is not seen by the circulating pumps when the system is in the normal cooling (noneconomizer) mode.

Air-cooled unitary direct-expansion units listed in the tables in and variable refrigerant flow (VRF) units that are equipped with an economizer in accordance with through shall include a fault detection and diagnostics system complying with the following:

1. The following temperature sensors shall be permanently installed to monitor system operation:
1. Outside air.
2. Supply air.
3. Return air.
2. Temperature sensors shall have an accuracy of ±2 F (1.1 C) over the range of 40 F to.
# 3. Refrigerant pressure sensors

where used, shall have an accuracy of 3 percent of full scale.

# 4. The unit controller

shall be configured to provide system status by indicating the following:

- 4.1. Free cooling available.
- 4.2. Economizer enabled.
- 4.3. Compressor enabled.
- 4.4. Heating enabled.
- 4.5. Fixed air low limit cycle active.
- 4.6. The current value of each sensor.

# 5. The unit controller

shall be capable of manually initiating each operating mode so that the operation of compressors, economizers, fans and the heating system can be independently tested and verified.

# 6. The unit

shall be configured to report faults to a fault management application available for access by day-to-day operating or service personnel, or annunciated locally on one thermostats.

# 7. The fault detection and diagnostics system

shall be configured to detect the following faults:

- 7.1. Air temperature sensor failure/fault.
- 7.2. Not economizing when the unit should be economizing.
- 7.3. Economizing when the unit should not be economizing.
- 7.4. Damper not modulating.
- 7.5. Excess outdoor air.

Supply air systems serving multiple zones shall be variable air volume (VAV) systems that have controls configured to reduce the volume of air that is reheated, recooled or mixed in each zone to one of the following:

1. Thirty percent of the zone design peak supply for systems without direct digital control (DDC).
2. Systems with DDC where all of the following apply:
1. 2.1. The airflow rate in the deadband between heating and cooling does not exceed the highest of the allowed rates under Items 3, 4, 5, or 6 of this section.
2. 2.2. The first stage of heating modulates the zone supply air temperature setpoint up to a maximum setpoint while the airflow is maintained at the deadband flow rate.
3. 2.3. The second stage of heating modulates the airflow rate from the deadband flow rate up to the heating maximum flow rate that is less than 50 percent of the zone design peak supply rate.
3. The outdoor airflow rate required to meet the minimum ventilation requirements of Chapter 4 of the International Mechanical Code.
4. The minimum primary airflow rate required to meet the Simplified Procedure ventilation.
# Requirements of ASHRAE Standard 62.1

1. The airflow rate as allowed by ASHRAE Standard 62.1 is permitted to be the average airflow rate.

2. Any higher rate that can be demonstrated to reduce overall system annual energy use by offsetting reheat/recool energy losses through a reduction in outdoor air intake for the system as approved by the code official.

3. The airflow rate required to comply with applicable codes or accreditation standards such as pressure relationships or minimum air change rates.

# Exemptions from the Requirement for VAV Control

The following individual ones or entire air distribution systems are exempted:

1. Ones or supply air systems where not less than 75 percent of the energy for reheating or for providing warm air in mixing systems is provided from a site-recovered, including condenser heat, or site-solar energy source.
2. Systems that prevent reheating, recooling, mixing or simultaneous supply of air that has been previously cooled, either mechanically or through the use of economizer systems, and air that has been previously mechanically heated.

# Single-Duct VAV Systems

Single-duct VAV systems shall use terminal devices capable of and configured to reduce the supply of primary supply air before reheating or recooling takes place.

# Multiple-Duct Systems

Systems that have one warm air duct and one cool air duct shall use terminal devices that are configured to reduce the flow from one duct to a minimum before mixing of air from the other duct takes place.

# Individual Dual-Duct or Mixing Heating and Cooling Systems

Individual dual-duct or mixing heating and cooling systems with a single fan and with total capacities greater than 0,000 tu/h (26.4 kW) 7.5 tons shall not be equipped with air economizers.

# Multiple-One HVAC Systems

Multiple-one HVAC systems shall include controls that are capable of and configured to automatically reset the supply-air temperature in response to representative building loads, or to outdoor air temperature. The controls shall be configured to reset the supply air temperature not less than 25 percent of the difference between the design supply-air temperature and the design room air temperature. Controls that adjust the reset based on one humidity are allowed in Climate zones 0, 1, 2, 3, 3C and 4 through 8. HVAC zones that are expected to experience relatively constant loads shall have maximum airflow designed to accommodate the fully reset supply-air temperature.

1. Systems that prevent reheating, recooling or mixing of heated and cooled supply air.
2. Seventy-five percent of the energy for reheating is from site-recovered or site-solar.
# 3. Systems in Climate

ones 0A, 1A and 3A with less than 3,000 cfm (1500 L/s) of design outside air.

4. Systems in Climate one 2A with less than 10,000 cfm (5000 L/s) of design outside air.

5. Systems in Climate ones 0A, 1A, 2A and 3A with not less than 80 percent outside air and employing exhaust air energy recovery complying with C.

C

C

C In Climate ones 0A, 1A, 2A and 3A, the system design shall allow supply-air temperature reset while dehumidification is provided. When dehumidification control is active, air economizers shall be locked out.

C

C multiple- one VAV systems with direct digital control of individual one boxes reporting to a central control panel shall have automatic controls configured to reduce outdoor air intake flow below design rates in response to changes in system ventilation efficiency (Ev) as defined by the International Mechanical Code.

1. VAV systems with tonal transfer fans that recirculate air from other ones without directly mixing it with outdoor air, dual-duct dual-fan VAV systems, and VAV systems with fan-powered terminal units.
2. Systems where total design exhaust airflow is more than 70 percent of total design outdoor air intake flow requirements.

C P

C P Parallel-flow fan-powered VAV air terminals shall have automatic controls configured to:

1. Turn off the terminal fan except when space heating is required or where required for ventilation.
2. Turn on the terminal fan as the first stage of heating before the heating coil is activated.
3. During heating for warmup or setback temperature control, either:

C

C For systems with direct digital control of individual ones reporting to the central control panel, the static pressure setpoint shall be reset based on the one requiring the most pressure. In such case, the setpoint is reset lower until one damper is nearly wide open. The direct digital controls shall be capable of monitoring one damper positions or shall have an alternative method of indicating the need for static pressure that is configured to provide all of the following:
1. Automatic detection of any one that excessively drives the reset logic.

2. Generation of an alarm to the system operational location.

3. Allowance for an operator to readily remove one or more ones from the reset algorithm.

# Static pressure sensors used to control VAV fans

shall be located such that the controller setpoint is not greater than 1.2 inches w.c. (2 Pa). Where this results in one or more sensors being located downstream of ma or duct splits, not less than one sensor shall be located on each ma or branch to ensure that static pressure can be maintained in each branch.

# Demand control ventilation (DCV) shall be provided for the following:

1. Spaces with ventilation provided by single- one systems where an air-side economizer is provided in accordance with Section C403.5.
2. Spaces larger than 250 square feet (23.2 m²) in climate ones 5A, 6, 7, and 8 and spaces larger than 500 square feet (46.5 m²) in other climate ones which have a design occupant load of 15 people or greater per 1,000 square feet (3 m²) of floor area, as established in Table 403.3.1.1 of the International Mechanical Code, and are served by systems with one or more of the following:
1. An air-side economizer.
2. Automatic modulating control of the outdoor air damper.
3. A design outdoor airflow greater than 3,000 cfm (1416 L/s).
3. Spaces served by systems with energy recovery in accordance with C and that have a floor area less than:
1. 6000 square feet (2600 m²) in climate one 3C.
2. 2000 square feet (10 m²) in climate ones 1A, 3, and 4.
3. 1000 square feet (0 m²) in climate ones 2A, 2, 3A, 4A, 4C, 5 and 6.
4. 400 square feet (40 m²) in climate ones 7 and 8.
4. Multiple- one systems without direct digital control of individual ones communicating with a central control panel.
5. Spaces served by multiple- one systems with a system design outdoor airflow less than 750 cfm (354 L/s).
6. Spaces where more than 75 percent of the space design outdoor airflow is required for makeup air that is exhausted from the space or transfer air that is required for makeup air that is exhausted from other spaces.
7. Spaces with one of the following occupancy classifications as defined in Table
# 403.3.1.1 of the International e ani al Code

Correctional cells, education laboratories, barber, beauty and nail salons, and bowling alley seating areas.

# Ventilation systems employed in parking garages

Ventilation systems employed in parking garages used for storing or handling automobiles operating under their own power shall meet all of the following:

1. Separate ventilation systems and control systems shall be provided for each parking garage section.
2. Control systems for each parking garage section shall automatically detect and control contaminant levels in accordance with the International e ani al Code, and shall be capable of and configured to reduce fan airflow to 20 percent or less of the design capacity.
3. The ventilation system for each parking garage section shall have controls and devices that result in fan motor demand of no more than 30 percent of design wattage at 50 percent of the design airflow.

Garage ventilation systems serving a single parking garage section having a total ventilation system motor nameplate horsepower (ventilation system motor nameplate kilowatt) not exceeding 5 hp (3.7 kW) at fan system design conditions and where the parking garage section has no mechanical cooling or mechanical heating.

# Units that provide ventilation air

Units that provide ventilation air to multiple ones and operate in conjunction with one heating and cooling systems shall not use heating or heat recovery to warm supply air to a temperature greater than 60 F (16 C) when representative building loads or outdoor air temperatures indicate that the majority of ones require cooling.

Units that heat the airstream using only series energy recovery when representative building loads or outdoor air temperature indicate that the majority of ones require cooling in Climate ones 0A, 1A, 2A, 3A, and 4A.

# Energy recovery ventilation systems

Energy recovery ventilation systems shall be provided as specified in either C or C, as applicable.

# Nontransient dwelling units

Nontransient dwelling units shall be provided with outdoor air energy recovery ventilation systems with an enthalpy recovery ratio of not less than 50 percent at cooling design condition and not less than 60 percent at heating design condition.

1. Nontransient dwelling units in Climate one 3C.
2. Nontransient dwelling units with not more than 500 square feet (46 m²) of
# Conditioned Floor Area in Climate Zones

1. Conditioned floor area in Climate Zones 0, 1, 2, 3, 4C and 5C and either adjoin an open-ended corridor or do not adjoin a corridor.

2. Nontransient dwelling units with not more than 500 square feet (46 m²) of conditioned floor area that are located in Climate Zones 1A, 2, 3, and 3C.

3. Energy recovery ratio requirements at heating design condition in Climate Zones 0, 1 and 2.

4. Energy recovery ratio requirements at cooling design condition in Climate Zones 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8.

# Energy Recovery System Requirements

Where the supply airflow rate of a fan system serving a space other than a nontransient dwelling unit exceeds the values specified in T C and C, the system shall include an energy recovery system. The energy recovery system shall provide an energy recovery ratio of not less than 50 percent at design conditions. Where an air economizer is required, the energy recovery system shall include a bypass or controls that permit operation of the economizer as required by T C.

# Exemptions from Energy Recovery Ventilation System Requirements

An energy recovery ventilation system shall not be required in any of the following conditions:

1. Where energy recovery systems are prohibited by the International Mechanical Code.
2. Laboratory fume hood systems that include not fewer than one of the following features:
1. Variable-air-volume hood exhaust and room supply systems configured to reduce exhaust and makeup air volume to 50 percent or less of design values.
2. Direct makeup (auxiliary) air supply equal to or greater than 75 percent of the exhaust rate, heated not warmer than 2°F (1.1°C) above room setpoint, cooled to not cooler than 3°F (1.7°C) below room setpoint, with no humidification added, and no simultaneous heating and cooling used for dehumidification control.
3. Systems serving spaces that are heated to less than 60°F (15.5°C) and that are not cooled.
4. Heating energy recovery where more than 60 percent of the outdoor heating energy is provided from site-recovered or site-solar energy in Climate Zones 5 through 8.
5. Energy recovery ratio requirements at heating design condition in Climate Zones 0, 1 and 2.
6. Energy recovery ratio requirements at cooling design condition in Climate Zones 3C, 4C, 5, 5C, 6, 7 and 8.
7. Systems in Climate Zones 0 through 4 requiring dehumidification that employ series energy and have a minimum SERR of 0.40.
8. Where the largest source of air exhausted at a single location at the building exterior is less than 75 percent of the design outdoor air flow rate.
9. Systems expected to operate less than 20 hours per week at the outdoor air percentage covered by T C.
10. Systems exhausting toxic, flammable, paint or corrosive fumes or dust.
11. Commercial kitchen hoods used for collecting and removing grease vapors.
smoke.
| T                          | C                                           |
| -------------------------- | ------------------------------------------- |
| RGY R CO RY R IR T         | P RC T O T OOR IR T IG IR O R T             |
| C I T                      | O                                           |
| 3 , 3C, 4 ,                | NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR                     |
| 4C, 5                      | 0 , 1 , 2 , NR NR NR NR 26,000 12,000 5,000 |
| 5C                         | 4,000                                       |
| 6                          | 28,000 11,000 5,500 4,500 3,500 2,500       |
|                            | 26,5000                                     |
| 0A, 1A, 2A, 3A, 4A, 5A, 6A | 26,000 16,000 5,500 4,500 3,500 2,000 1,000 |
| 7, 8                       | 4,500 4,000 2,500 1,000 140 120 100 80      |

For SI: 1 cfm 0.471 L/s.

NR Not Required.
# Replacement Air and Kitchen Exhaust Systems

|                    |                                 | T  | C     |       |       |       |       |       |     |
| ------------------ | ------------------------------- | -- | ----- | ----- | ----- | ----- | ----- | ----- | --- |
| RGY R CO RY R IR T | P RC T O T OOR IR T IG IR O R T |    |       |       |       |       |       |       |     |
| C I T              | O                               |    |       |       |       |       |       |       |     |
| R                  |                                 |    |       |       |       |       |       |       |     |
| 3C                 | NR                              | NR | NR    | NR    | NR    | NR    | NR    |       |     |
| 0                  | 1                               | 2  | NR    | 1,500 | 5,000 | 4,000 | 3,000 | 1,500 |     |
| 3                  | 4C                              | 5C |       |       |       |       |       | 120   |     |
| 0A                 | 1A                              | 2A | 2,500 | 2,000 | 1,000 | 500   | 140   | 120   | 100 |
| 3A                 | 4                               | 5  |       |       |       |       |       | 80    |     |
| 4A                 | 5A                              | 6A | 200   | 130   | 100   | 80    | 70    | 60    | 50  |
| 6                  | 7                               | 8  |       |       |       |       |       | 40    |     |

For SI: 1 cfm = 0.471 L/s.

NR Not Required.

Replacement air introduced directly into the exhaust hood cavity shall not be greater than 10 percent of the hood exhaust airflow rate. Conditioned supply air delivered to any space shall not exceed the greater of the following:

1. The ventilation rate required to meet the space heating or cooling load.
2. The hood exhaust flow minus the available transfer air from adjacent space where available transfer air is considered to be that portion of outdoor ventilation air not required to satisfy other exhaust needs, such as restrooms, and not required to maintain pressurization of adjacent spaces.

Kitchen exhaust hood systems serving Type I exhaust hoods shall be provided with demand control kitchen ventilation (DCV) controls where a kitchen or kitchen/dining facility has a total Type I kitchen hood exhaust airflow rate greater than 5,000 cfm (2360 L/s). DCV systems shall be configured to provide a minimum of 50 percent reduction in exhaust and replacement air system airflow rates. Systems shall include controls necessary to modulate exhaust and replacement air system airflows in response to appliance operation and to maintain full capture and containment of smoke, effluent and combustion products during cooking and idle operation. Each hood shall be a factory-built commercial exhaust hood listed by a nationally recognized testing laboratory and shall have a maximum exhaust rate as specified in TC.

Where a single hood, or hood section, is installed over appliances with different duty ratings, the maximum allowable flow rate for the hood or hood section shall be based on the requirements for the highest appliance duty rating under the hood or hood section.

UL 710 listed exhaust hoods that have a design maximum exhaust flow rate not
greater than 250 cfm per linear foot of hood that serve kitchen or kitchen/dining facilities with a total kitchen hood exhaust airflow rate less than 5000 cfm (2360 L/s).

2. Where allowed by the International e ani al Code, an energy recovery ventilation system is installed on the kitchen exhaust with a sensible heat recovery effectiveness of not less than 40 percent on not less than 50 percent of the total exhaust hood airflow.
# Table of HVAC Controls

|                            |     | T   | C   |     |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |    |   |   |   |   |   |   |
| -------------------------- | --- | --- | --- | --- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | -- | - | - | - | - | - | - |
| I                          | T   | H   | T   | O   | R | T | C | P | R | I | R | O | OT | O | H | O | G | T | H |
| Wall-mounted canopy        | 140 | 210 | 280 | 385 |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |    |   |   |   |   |   |   |
| Single island              | 280 | 350 | 420 | 4 0 |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |    |   |   |   |   |   |   |
| Double island (per side)   | 175 | 210 | 280 | 385 |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |    |   |   |   |   |   |   |
| Eyebrow ackshelf/Pass-over | 175 | 175 | NA  | NA  |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |    |   |   |   |   |   |   |
|                            | 210 | 210 | 280 | NA  |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |    |   |   |   |   |   |   |

For SI: 1 cfm = 0.471 L/s, 1 foot = 304.8 mm. NA = Not Allowed.

# Controls in Group R-1

In buildings containing more than 50 guestrooms, each guestroom shall be provided with controls complying with the provisions of C and C.

# Temperature Control Modes

1. When the guestroom is rented but unoccupied, the controls shall automatically raise the cooling setpoint and lower the heating setpoint by not less than 4°F (2°C) from the occupant setpoint within 30 minutes after the occupants have left the guestroom.
2. When the guestroom is unrented and unoccupied, the controls shall automatically raise the cooling setpoint to not lower than 80°F (27°C) and lower the heating setpoint to not higher than 60°F (16°C). Unrented and unoccupied guestroom mode shall be initiated within 16 hours of the guestroom being continuously occupied or where a net or ed guestroom control system indicates that the guestroom is unrented and unoccupied for more than 20 minutes. A net or ed guestroom control system that is capable of returning the thermostat setpoints to default occupied setpoints 60 minutes prior to the time a guestroom is scheduled to be occupied is not precluded by this section. Cooling that is capable of limiting relative humidity with a setpoint not lower than 65-percent relative humidity during unoccupied periods is not precluded by this section.
3. When the guestroom is occupied, HVAC setpoints shall return to their occupied setpoints once occupancy is sensed.

# Additional Controls

Controls shall be provided on each HVAC system that...
are capable of and configured to automatically turn off the ventilation and exhaust fans within 20 minutes of the occupants leaving the guestroom, or isolation devices shall be provided to each guestroom that are capable of automatically shutting off the supply of outdoor air to and exhaust air from the guestroom.

Guestroom ventilation systems are not precluded from having an automatic daily pre-occupancy purge cycle that provides daily outdoor air ventilation during unrented periods at the design ventilation rate for 60 minutes, or at a rate and duration equivalent to one air change.

Outdoor air intake and exhaust openings and stairway and shaft vents shall be provided with Class I motorized dampers. The dampers shall have an air leakage rate not greater than 4 cfm/ft² (20.3 L/s m²) of damper surface area at 1.0 inch water gauge (24 Pa) and shall be labeled by an approved agency when tested in accordance with C for such purpose.

Outdoor air intake and exhaust dampers shall be installed with automatic controls configured to close when the systems or spaces served are not in use or during unoccupied period warm-up and setback operation, unless the systems served require outdoor or exhaust air in accordance with the International Mechanical Code or the dampers are opened to provide intentional economizer cooling.

Stairway and elevator shaft vent dampers shall be installed with automatic controls configured to open upon the activation of any fire alarm initiating device of the building's fire alarm system or the interruption of power to the damper, or by thermostatic control systems.

Nonmotorized gravity dampers shall be an alternative to motorized dampers for exhaust and relief openings as follows:

1. In buildings less than three stories in height above grade plane.
2. In buildings of any height located in Climate Zones 0, 1, 2 or 3.
3. Where the design exhaust capacity is not greater than 300 cfm (142 L/s).

Nonmotorized gravity dampers shall have an air leakage rate not greater than 20 cfm/ft² (101.6 L/s m²) where not less than 24 inches (610 mm) in either dimension and 40 cfm/ft² (203.2 L/s m²) where less than 24 inches (610 mm) in either dimension. The rate of air leakage shall be determined at 1.0 inch water gauge (24 Pa) when tested in accordance with C for such purpose. The dampers shall be labeled by an approved agency.

Occupied-standby controls are required for zones and systems serving zones where all spaces served by the zone are required to have occupant sensor lighting controls by Section C405.2.1 and are an ASHRAE Standard 62.1 occupancy category where the ASHRAE Standard 62.1 Ventilation Rate Procedure allows the ventilation air to be reduced to zero when the space is in occupied-standby mode. Spaces meeting these criteria include:

1. Post-secondary classrooms/lecture/training rooms
2. Conference/meeting/multipurpose rooms
3. Lounges/breakrooms
4. Enclosed offices
# 5. Open plan office areas

# 6. Corridors

C          O                     C

C          O                     C       For ones meeting the occupied-standby control criteria, within five (5) minutes of all rooms in that one entering occupied-standby mode, the one control shall operate as follows:

1. Active heating set point shall be setback at least 1 F (0.55 C).
2. Active cooling set point shall be setup at least 1 F (0.55 C).
3. All airflow supplied to the one shall be shut off whenever the space temperature is between the active heating and cooling set points.

Multiple one systems without automatic one flow control dampers.

C          O                       C

C          O                       C         Multiple one systems that can automatically reset the effective minimum outdoor air setpoint and that serve ones with occupied-standby one controls shall reset the effective minimum outdoor air set-point based on a one outdoor air requirement of zero for all ones in occupied-standby mode. Sequences of operation for system outside air reset shall comply with an approved method.

C

C                                         A fan that is the air mover for a heating or cooling system that serves an individual dwelling unit shall not be used to provide outdoor air.

Where the fan efficacy is not less than 1.2 cfm of outdoor airflow per watt when there is no demand for heating or cooling.

C

C                             Fans in HVAC systems shall comply with          C through C         .

C

C                  For each fan system serving an occupied space or other enclosed space that includes one or more fans or fan arrays with fan electrical input power greater than 1 kW, fan system electrical input power determined per Section C403.8.1.2 at the fan system design airflow shall not be greater than the limit is calculated in accordance with Section C403.8.1.1. This section does not apply to fans service heat reflection equipment.
| Air system Component                                                                                                                                                                                                                       | PPY                                   | PO              |        |       |                 |        |       |
| ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------- | --------------- | ------ | ----- | --------------- | ------ | ----- |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | 5,000                                 | 5,000 to 10,000 | 10,000 | 5,000 | 5,000 to 10,000 | 10,000 |       |
| W/cfm                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | 0.413                                 | 0.472           | 0.480  | 0.243 | 0.267           | 0.248  |       |
| Particle filtration (select all that apply)                                                                                                                                                                                                | 0.0 4                                 | 0.07            | 0.073  | 0.0 7 | 0.084           | 0.075  |       |
| ERV 12                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | 0.210                                 | 0.177           | 0.165  | 0.217 | 0.185           | 0.168  |       |
| HEPA filter                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | 0.347                                 | 0.2 2           | 0.277  | 0.357 | 0.304           | 0.278  |       |
| Heating (select all that apply)                                                                                                                                                                                                            | 0.047                                 | 0.050           | 0.055  | 0.04  | 0.053           | 0.057  |       |
| Electric heat                                                                                                                                                                                                                              | 0.047                                 | 0.050           | 0.055  | 0.04  | 0.042           | 0.038  |       |
| Gas or oil furnace 0 Et or 0 AFUE                                                                                                                                                                                                          | 0.071                                 | 0.060           | 0.073  | 0.061 | 0.063           | 0.075  |       |
| Gas or oil furnace 0 Et or 0 AFUE                                                                                                                                                                                                          | 0.117                                 | 0.0             | 0.0 2  | 0.122 | 0.104           | 0.0 4  |       |
| Cooling and dehumidification (select all that apply)                                                                                                                                                                                       | 0.141                                 | 0.118           | 0.110  | 0.146 | 0.125           | 0.112  |       |
| Hydronic/D cooling coil, or heat pump coil (wet)                                                                                                                                                                                           | 0.141                                 | 0.118           | 0.110  | 0.146 | 0.125           | 0.112  |       |
| Fluid economizer coil                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | 0.141                                 | 0.118           | 0.110  | 0.146 | 0.125           | 0.112  |       |
| Desiccant system-solid or liquid                                                                                                                                                                                                           | 0.164                                 | 0.138           | 0.128  | 0.170 | 0.145           | 0.131  |       |
| Hot gas reheat coil                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | 0.047                                 | 0.040           | 0.037  | 0.04  | 0.042           | 0.038  |       |
| Series energy recovery                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | 0.141                                 | 0.118           | 0.110  | 0.146 | 0.125           | 0.112  |       |
| Evaporative humidifier/cooler in series with a cooling coil. Value shown is allowed W/cfm per 1.0 in. wg. Determine pressure loss (in. wg.) at the lesser of 400 fpm or maximum velocity allowed by the manufacturer. Calculation required | 0.233                                 | 0.1 6           | 0.184  | 0.241 | 0.205           | 0.186  |       |
| Energy recovery                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | Enthalpy Recovery Ratio 0.50 and 0.55 | 0.141           | 0.118  | 0.110 | 0.146           | 0.125  | 0.112 |
| Enthalpy Recovery Ratio 0.55 and 0.60                                                                                                                                                                                                      | 0.166                                 | 0.140           | 0.130  | 0.172 | 0.147           | 0.133  |       |
| Enthalpy Recovery Ratio 0.60 and 0.65                                                                                                                                                                                                      | 0.1 1                                 | 0.161           | 0.151  | 0.1 8 | 0.16            | 0.153  |       |

# Enthalpy Recovery Ratio

| 0.65 and 0.70 | 0.217 | 0.182 | 0.171 | 0.224 | 0.1 1 | 0.173 |
| ------------- | ----- | ----- | ----- | ----- | ----- | ----- |
| 0.70 and 0.75 | 0.242 | 0.204 | 0.1 1 | 0.250 | 0.213 | 0.1 3 |
| 0.75 and 0.80 | 0.267 | 0.225 | 0.212 | 0.276 | 0.235 | 0.213 |
| 0.80          | 0.2 2 | 0.246 | 0.232 | 0.301 | 0.257 | 0.234 |

# Run-around liquid or refrigerant coils

| 0.141 | 0.118 | 0.110 | 0.146 | 0.125 | 0.112 |
| ----- | ----- | ----- | ----- | ----- | ----- |

# Gas-phase filtration

| 0.233 | 0.1 6 | 0.184 | 0.241 | 0.205 | 0.186 |
| ----- | ----- | ----- | ----- | ----- | ----- |

# Other

| Economizer return damper                  | 0.04  | 0.042 | 0.038 | 0.04  | 0.043 | 0.03  |
| ----------------------------------------- | ----- | ----- | ----- | ----- | ----- | ----- |
| 100 Outdoor air systemᶜ                   | 0.000 | 0.000 | 0.000 | 0.073 | 0.104 | 0.112 |
| Low-turndown single-zone VAV fan systemsᵈ | 0.000 | 0.000 | 0.000 | 0.073 | 0.104 | 0.0 4 |
| Air blender                               | 0.047 | 0.040 | 0.037 | 0.04  | 0.042 | 0.038 |

# Sound attenuation section fans serving spaces with design background noise goals below NC35

| 0.035 | 0.030 | 0.027 | 0.036 | 0.032 | 0.02 |
| ----- | ----- | ----- | ----- | ----- | ---- |

# Deducation for systems that feed a terminal unit or fan coil with a fan with electrical input power 1kWe

| -0.500 | -0.500 | -0.500 | -0.100 | -0.100 | -0.100 |
| ------ | ------ | ------ | ------ | ------ | ------ |

# Footnotes

a. See section C408.3.1.1 for requirements for a multi-zone VAV system.

b. Power allowances require further calculation. Multiply the actual pressure drop of the device or component by the fan power allowance in Table C403.8.1(2).

c. The 100 percent outdoor air system must serve 3 or more HVAC zones.

d. A low-turndown single-zone VAV fan system must be capable of and configured to reduce airflow to 50 percent of design airflow and use no more than 30 percent of the design wattage at that airflow. No more than 10 percent of the design load served by the equipment shall have fixed loads.

e. The deduction of 0.500 W/cfm is a default value for multi-zone VAV fan systems. If the terminal unit or fan coil manufacturer can demonstrate that the share of the unit's fan power required to move the fan system's air is less than 0.500 W/cfm, that value may be used. The W/cfm shall be calculated by dividing the power required to operate the terminal unit's fan at fan system design conditions by the airflow of the terminal unit at those conditions.
# Table of Air System Components

| Air System Component                                                                                                                                                                                        | Airflow (cfm) |       |        |        |       |       |
| ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------- | ----- | ------ | ------ | ----- | ----- |
| 5,000                                                                                                                                                                                                       | 10,000        | 5,000 | 10,000 | 10,000 |       |       |
| Exhaust, Return, Relief, and Transfer System Allowance for each system                                                                                                                                      | 0.231         | 0.256 | 0.248  | 0.14   | 0.12  | 0.200 |
| Filter (any ERV value)                                                                                                                                                                                      | 0.04          | 0.042 | 0.038  | 0.04   | 0.043 | 0.03  |
| Enthalpy Recovery Ratio 0.50 and 0.55                                                                                                                                                                       | 0.146         | 0.125 | 0.112  | 0.146  | 0.128 | 0.114 |
| Enthalpy Recovery Ratio 0.55 and 0.60                                                                                                                                                                       | 0.173         | 0.148 | 0.133  | 0.173  | 0.150 | 0.135 |
| Enthalpy Recovery Ratio 0.60 and 0.65                                                                                                                                                                       | 0.1           | 0.170 | 0.153  | 0.1    | 0.173 | 0.155 |
| Enthalpy Recovery Ratio 0.65 and 0.70                                                                                                                                                                       | 0.225         | 0.12  | 0.173  | 0.226  | 0.16  | 0.176 |
| Enthalpy Recovery Ratio 0.70 and 0.75                                                                                                                                                                       | 0.250         | 0.214 | 0.13   | 0.252  | 0.218 | 0.16  |
| Enthalpy Recovery Ratio 0.75 and 0.80                                                                                                                                                                       | 0.276         | 0.236 | 0.213  | 0.277  | 0.240 | 0.216 |
| Enthalpy Recovery Ratio 0.8                                                                                                                                                                                 | 0.302         | 0.258 | 0.234  | 0.303  | 0.263 | 0.236 |
| Run-around liquid or refrigerant coils                                                                                                                                                                      | 0.146         | 0.125 | 0.112  | 0.146  | 0.128 | 0.114 |
| Special exhaust and return system requirements (select all that apply)                                                                                                                                      |               |       |        |        |       |       |
| Return or exhaust systems required to be fully ducted by code or accreditation standards                                                                                                                    | 0.122         | 0.105 | 0.04   | 0.122  | 0.107 | 0.06  |
| Return and/or exhaust airflow control devices required by code or accreditation standards to maintain pressure relationships between spaces                                                                 | 0.122         | 0.105 | 0.04   | 0.122  | 0.107 | 0.06  |
| Laboratory and vivarium exhaust systems in high-rise buildings for vertical duct exceeding 75 feet. Value shown is allowed W/cfm per 0.25 inch wg for each 100 feet exceeding 75 feet. Calculation required | 0.061         | 0.053 | 0.047  | 0.061  | 0.054 | 0.048 |
| Exhaust system serving fume hoods                                                                                                                                                                           | 0.085         | 0.074 | 0.066  | 0.085  | 0.075 | 0.067 |

# IOSafety Cabinet

Value shown is allowed W/cfm per 1.0 inch wg air pressure drop

| 0.241 | 0.206 | 0.186 | 0.242 | 0.210 | 0.188 |
| ----- | ----- | ----- | ----- | ----- | ----- |

Calculation requiredc

Exhaust filters, scrubbers, or other exhaust treatment required by code or standard.

Value shown is allowed W/cfm per 1.0 inch wg air pressure drop.

| 0.241 | 0.206 | 0.186 | 0.242 | 0.210 | 0.188 |
| ----- | ----- | ----- | ----- | ----- | ----- |

Calculation requiredc

Other Sound attenuation section (fans serving spaces with design background noise goals below NC35)

| 0.036 | 0.032 | 0.02 | 0.036 | 0.032 | 0.02 |
| ----- | ----- | ---- | ----- | ----- | ---- |

a. See Section C408.3.1.1 for requirements for a multi-zone VAV System.

b. Particle filter pressure loss can only be counted once per fan system.

c. Power allowances require further calculation. Multiply the actual pressure drop of the device or component by the fan power allowance in Table C403.8.1(2).
# PO R I IT TIT CORR CTIO CTOR

| Altitude (ft)   | Correction factor |
| --------------- | ----------------- |
| 3,000           | 1.000             |
| 3,000 and 4,000 | 0.86              |
| 4,000 and 5,000 | 0.864             |
| 5,000 and 6,000 | 0.832             |
| 6,000           | 0.801             |

# T C

# OTOR CTRIC I P T PO R O OTOR

| Motor Nameplate Horsepower | Variable-Speed Drive (kW) | Without Variable-Speed Drive (kW) |
| -------------------------- | ------------------------- | --------------------------------- |
| 1                          | 0.6                       | 0.8                               |
| 1 and 1.5                  | 1.38                      | 1.2                               |
| 1.5 and 2                  | 1.84                      | 1.72                              |
| 2 and 3                    | 2.73                      | 2.57                              |
| 3 and 5                    | 4.38                      | 4.17                              |
| 5 and 7.5                  | 6.43                      | 6.15                              |
| 7.5 and 10                 | 8.46                      | 8.13                              |
| 10 and 15                  | 12.47                     | 12.03                             |
| 15 and 20                  | 16.55                     | 16.04                             |
| 20 and 25                  | 20.58                     | 1 . 2                             |
| 25 and 30                  | 24.5                      | 23.77                             |
| 30 and 40                  | 32.74                     | 31.70                             |
| 40 and 50                  | 40.71                     | 3 .46                             |
| 50 and 60                  | 48.50                     | 47.10                             |
| 60 and 75                  | 60.45                     | 58.87                             |
| 75 and 100                 | 80.40                     | 78.17                             |

a. This table cannot be used for Motor Nameplate Horsepower values greater than 100.

b. This table is to be used only with motors with a service factor 1.15. If the service factor is not provided, this table may not be used.

# C P

The maximum allowed fan system electrical input power, shall be determined in accordance with the following steps 1 through 5:

1. The fan system's classification shall be determined. A fan system is considered to be multi one VAV where it meets the following requirements: fan systems that do not meet the following requirements shall be classified as other fans:
2. 1. The fan system shall serve three or more HVAC zones and airflow to each shall be individually controlled based on heating, cooling and/or ventilation requirements.
2. The sum of the minimum airflows for each HVAC zone shall be not greater than 40 percent of the fan system design conditions.

Hospital, vivarium, and laboratory systems that use flow control devices on exhaust or return to maintain space pressure relationships necessary for occupant health and safety or environmental control shall use the multi one VAV fan power allowances.

Determine the fan system airflow and choose the applicable table(s) for fan power.
# 2. Fan Power Allowances

2.1 For single-cabinet fan systems, use the fan system airflow and the power allowances in both Table C403.8.1(1) and Table C403.8.1(2).

2.2 For supply-only fan systems, use the fan system airflow and power allowances in Table C403.8.1(1).

2.3 For relief fan systems, use the design relief airflow and the power allowances in Table C403.8.1(2).

2.4 For exhaust, return and transfer fan systems, use the fan system airflow and the power allowances in Table C403.8.1(2).

2.5 For complex fan systems and DOAS with energy recovery fan systems, separately calculate the fan power allowance for the supply and return/exhaust systems and sum them. For the supply airflow at the fan system design conditions, and the power allowances in Table C403.8.1(1). For the return/exhaust airflow, use return or exhaust airflow at the fan system design conditions, and the power allowances in Table C403.8.1(2).

# 3. Fan System Components

For each fan system determine the components included in the fan system and sum the fan power allowances of those components. All fan systems shall include the System  ase Allowance. If, for a given component, only a portion of the fan system airflow passes through the component, calculate the fan power allowance for the component per evaluation 4-7:

- FPAad = The corrected fan power allowance for the component in W/cfm
- comp = The airflow through component in cfm
- sys = The fan system airflow in cfm
- FPAcomp = The fan power allowance of the component from Table C403.8.1(1) or Table C403.8.1(2)

# 4. Fan Power Limit Calculation

Multiply the fan system airflow by the sum of the fan power allowances for the fan system, then divide by 1000 to convert to W.

- FPL = The fan power limit in W
- sys = The fan system airflow in cfm (L/s)
- FPAsum = The sum of the fan power allowance for the system in W/cfm
- 1000 = The conversion from W to kW

# 5. Elevation Adjustment

For building sites at elevations greater than 3,000 feet (1000 m), multiply the fan power limit by the correction factor from Table C408.3.1(3).

FPLalt = The adjusted fan power limit in W.
FPL The fan power limit in W calculated in step 4.

Cₐₗₜ The altitude correction factor from Table C408.3.1(3)

C I P

C I P The fan system electrical input power is the sum of the fan electrical input power of each fan or fan array included in the fan system other than fans with fan electrical input power 1 kW. If variable speed drives are used their efficiency losses shall be included. Fan system input power shall be calculated with mid-life filter pressure drop, which is the mean of the clean filter pressure drop and design final filter pressure drop. The fan electrical input power for each fan or fan array shall be determined using one of the following methods. There is no requirement to use the same method for all fans in a fan system:

1. Use the default fan electrical input power in Table C408.3.1(4) for one or more of the fans. This method cannot be used for complex fan systems.
2. Use the fan electrical input power at fan system design conditions provided by the manufacturer of the fan, fan array, or equipment that includes the fan or fan array, calculated per a test procedure included in 10 CFR Part 430, 10 CFR Part 431, ANSI/AHRI Standard 210, ASHRAE 51, AHRI Standard 430, AHRI Standard 440, or ISO 5801.
3. Use the fan electrical input power provided by the manufacturer, calculated at fan system design conditions per one of the methods listed in section 5.3 of ANSI/AHRI 208.
4. Use the fan nameplate electrical input power.

C

For each fan, the fan brake horsepower (bhp) shall be indicated on the construction documents and the selected motor shall be not larger than the first available motor size greater than the following:

1. For fans less than 6 bhp (4476 W), 1.5 times the fan brake horsepower.
2. For fans 6 bhp (4476 W) and larger, 1.3 times the fan brake horsepower.

- Fans equipped with electronic speed control devices to vary the fan airflow as a function of load.
- Fans with a fan nameplate electrical input power of less than 0.8 kW.
- Systems complying with C fan system motor nameplate hp (Option 1).
- Fans with motor nameplate horsepower less than 1 hp (746 W).

C

Each fan and fan array shall have a fan energy index (FEI) of not less than 1.00 at the design point of operation, as determined in accordance with C by an approved independent testing laboratory and labeled by the manufacturer. Each fan and fan array used for a variable-air-volume system shall have an FEI of not less than 0.5 at the design point of operation, as determined in accordance with C by an approved independent testing laboratory and labeled by the manufacturer. The FEI for fan
arrays shall be calculated in accordance with C Annex C.

The following fans are not required to have a fan energy index:

1. Fans that are not embedded fans with motor nameplate horsepower of less than 1.0 hp (0.75 kW) or with a nameplate electrical input power of less than 0.8 kW.
2. Embedded fans that have a motor nameplate horsepower of 5 hp (3.7 kW) or less, or with a fan system electrical input power of 4.1 kW or less.
3. Multiple fans operated in series or parallel as the functional equivalent of a single fan that have a combined motor nameplate horsepower of 5 hp (3.7 kW) or less or with a fan system electrical input power of 4.1 kW or less.
4. Fans that are part of equipment covered in C.
5. Fans included in an equipment package certified by an approved agency for air or energy performance.
6. Ceiling fans, which are defined as nonportable devices suspended from a ceiling or overhead structure for circulating air via the rotation of the blades.
7. Fans used for moving gases at temperatures above 482 F (250 C).
8. Fans used for operation in explosive atmospheres.
9. Reversible fans used for tunnel ventilation.
10. Fans that are intended to operate only during emergency conditions.
11. Fans outside the scope of C.

C

C Motors for fans that are not less than 1/12 hp (0.062 kW) and are less than 1 hp (0.746 kW) shall be electronically commutated motors or shall have a minimum motor efficiency of 70 percent, rated in accordance with O C R. These motors shall have the means to adjust motor speed for either balancing or remote control. The use of belt-driven fans to sheave adjustments for airflow balancing instead of a varying motor speed shall be permitted.

The following motors are not required to comply with this section:

1. Motors in the airstream within fan coils and terminal units that only provide heating to the space served.
2. Motors in space-conditioning equipment that comply with C or C through C.
3. Motors that comply with C.

C

C Mechanical ventilation system fans with motors less than 1/12 hp (0.062 kW) in capacity shall meet the efficacy requirements of T C at one or more rating points. Airflow shall be tested in accordance with the test procedure referenced by Table C403.8.5 and listed. The airflow shall be reported in the product listing or on the label. Fan efficacy shall be reported in the product listing or shall be derived from the input power and airflow values reported in the product listing or on the label. Fan efficacy for fully ducted HRV, ERV, balanced, and in-line fans shall be determined at a static pressure not less than 0.2 inch w.c. (4.85 Pa). Fan efficacy for ducted range hoods, bathroom, and utility room fans shall be determined at a static pressure not less than 0.1 inch w.c. (24.1 Pa).
1. Where ventilation fans are a component of a listed heating or cooling appliance.
2. Dryer exhaust duct power ventilators, domestic range hoods and domestic range booster fans that operate intermittently.
3. Fans in radon mitigation systems.
4. Fans not covered within the scope of the test methods referenced in Table C403.8.5.
5. Ceiling fans regulated under 10 CFR 430 Appendix U.
# TEST PROCEDURE

| T                             | C   | O    | C                  | P                        | CITY | TI | TIO | IC | CY |
| ----------------------------- | --- | ---- | ------------------ | ------------------------ | ---- | -- | --- | -- | -- |
| Balanced ventilation system   | Any | 1.2ᵃ | ASHRAE Standard 51 | (ANSI/A CA Standard 210) |      |    |     |    |    |
| HRV, ERV                      | Any | 1.2  | CAN/CSA 43 -18     |                          |      |    |     |    |    |
| Range hood                    | Any | 2.8  |                    |                          |      |    |     |    |    |
| In-line supply or exhaust fan | Any | 3.8  |                    |                          |      |    |     |    |    |
| Other exhaust fan             | 200 | 200  | 4.0                |                          |      |    |     |    |    |

For SI: 1 cfm/ft² = 0.47 L/s.

a. For balanced systems, HRVs, and ERVs, determine the efficacy as the outdoor airflow divided by the total fan power.

Controls shall be provided for fans in accordance with and as required for specific systems provided in.

Each cooling system listed in shall be designed to vary the indoor fan airflow as a function of load and shall comply with the following requirements:

1. Direct expansion (D) and chilled water cooling units that control the capacity of the mechanical cooling directly based on space temperature shall have not fewer than two stages of fan control. Low or minimum speed shall not be greater than 66 percent of full speed. At low or minimum speed, the fan system shall draw not more than 40 percent of the fan power at full fan speed. Low or minimum speed shall be used during periods of low cooling load and ventilation-only operation.
2. Other units including D cooling units and chilled water units that control the space temperature by modulating the airflow to the space shall have modulating fan control. Minimum speed shall be not greater than 50 percent of full speed. At minimum speed the fan system shall draw not more than 30 percent of the power at full fan speed. Low or minimum speed shall be used during periods of low cooling load and ventilation-only operation.
3. Units that include an air-side economizer in accordance with shall have not fewer than two speeds of fan control during economizer operation.
# 1.

odulating fan control is not re uired for chilled water and evaporative cooling units with fan motors of less than 1 hp (0.746 kW) where the units are not used to provide ventilation air and the indoor fan cycles with the load.

# 2.

Where the volume of outdoor air re uired to comply with the ventilation re uirements of the International e ani al Code at low speed exceeds the air that would be delivered at the speed defined in C, the minimum speed shall be selected to provide the re uired ventilation air.
# Cooling

# Cooling Type

| Cooling | Chilled water and evaporative cooling | Any | 65,000 tu/h |
| ------- | ------------------------------------- | --- | ----------- |
| 1/4 hp  | Any                                   |     |             |

For SI: 1 British thermal unit per hour = 0.2931 W = 1 hp = 0.746 kW.

# Exhaust System Requirements

Where an exhaust system serving a bathroom or toilet room is designed for intermittent operation, the exhaust system shall be provided with manual-on capability and one or more of the following controls:

1. A timer control that has a minimum setpoint not greater than 30 minutes.
2. An occupant sensor control that automatically turns off exhaust fans within 30 minutes after all occupants have left the space.
3. A humidity control capable of manual or automatic adjustment from a minimum setpoint not greater than 50 percent to a maximum setpoint not greater than 80 percent relative humidity.
4. A contaminant control that responds to a particle or gaseous concentration.

Bathroom and toilet room exhaust systems serving as an integral component of an outdoor air ventilation system in Group R-2, R-3, and R-4 occupancies shall not be required to provide controls other than manual on capability. An off setpoint shall not be used to comply with a minimum setpoint requirement.

# Ceiling Fans

Where provided, large-diameter ceiling fans shall be tested and labeled in accordance with C and shall meet the efficiency requirements of Table C403 and Section C403.1.
# Equipment Type

| Minimum Efficiency                                                                          | Test procedure                                                                          |
| ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| CFEI 1.00 at high (maximum) speed                                                           | 10 CFR 430 Appendix U or A CA Standard 230 and A CA Standard 208 (for FEI calculations) |
| CFEI 1.31 at 40% of high speed or the nearest speed that is not less than 40% of high speed |                                                                                         |
| CFEI 1.00 at high (maximum) speed                                                           | 10 CFR 430 Appendix U                                                                   |
| CFEI 1.31 at 40% of high speed or the nearest speed that is not less than 40% of high speed |                                                                                         |

a. The minimum efficiency requirements at both high speed and 40% of maximum speed shall be met or exceeded to comply with this code.

b. Ceiling fans are regulated as consumer products by 10 CFR 430.

c. Chapter 6 contains a complete specification of the referenced test procedure, including the referenced year version of the test procedure.

# Ceiling Fan Energy Index

The Ceiling Fan Energy Index shall be calculated as the ratio of the electric input power of a reference large-diameter ceiling fan to the electric input power of the actual large-diameter ceiling fan as calculated in accordance with A CA 208 with the following modifications to the calculations for the reference fan: using an airflow constant ( ) of 26,500 cfm (12.507 m3/s), a pressure constant (P) of 0.0027 in. of water (0.671 Pa), and fan efficiency constant ( ) of 42 percent.

# Gas Hot-Water Boiler Systems

Gas hot-water boiler systems for space heating with system input capacity capacities of at least not less than 1,000,000 tu/h (2 3 kW) but not more and not greater than 10,000,000 tu/h (2 31 kW) in new buildings shall comply with Sections C403.10.1 and C403.10.2

1. Where 25 percent of the annual space heating requirement is provided by on-site renewable energy, site-recovered energy, or heat recovery chillers.
2. Space heating boilers installed in individual dwelling units.
3. Where 50 percent or more of the design heating load is served using perimeter convective heating, radiant ceiling panels, or both.
4. Individual gas boilers with input capacity less than 300,000 tu/h (87 kW) shall not be included in the calculations of the total system input or total system efficiency.
# Gas Hot-Water Boilers

Gas hot-water boilers shall have a thermal efficiency (Eₜ) of not less than 0 percent where rated in accordance with the test procedures in Table C403.3.2(6). Systems with multiple boilers are allowed to meet this requirement where the space heating input provided by equipment with thermal efficiency (Eₜ) above or below 0 percent provides an input capacity-weighted average thermal efficiency of not less than 0 percent. For boilers rated only for combustion efficiency, the calculation for the input capacity-weighted average thermal efficiency shall use the combustion efficiency value.

# Hot-Water Distribution System

The hot-water distribution system shall be designed to meet the following:

1. Coils and other heat exchangers shall be selected so that at design conditions the hot water return temperature entering the boilers is 120 F (48.9 C) or less.
2. Under all operating conditions, the water temperature entering the boiler is not greater than 120 F (48.9 C), or the flow rate of supply hot water that recirculates directly into the return system, such as by three-way valves or minimum flow bypass controls, shall be no greater than 20 percent of the design flow of the boilers.

# Heat Rejection Equipment

Heat rejection equipment, including air-cooled condensers, dry coolers, open-circuit cooling towers, closed-circuit cooling towers and evaporative condensers, shall comply with this section. Heat rejection devices where energy usage is included in the equipment efficiency ratings listed in Table C and C.

# Fan Systems

Each fan system powered by an individual motor or array of motors with connected power, including the motor service factor, totaling 5 hp (3.7 kW) or more shall have controls and devices configured to automatically modulate the fan speed to control the leaving fluid temperature or condensing temperature and pressure of the heat rejection device. Fan motor power input shall be not more than 30 percent of design wattage at 50 percent of the design airflow.

1. Fans serving multiple refrigerant or fluid cooling circuits.
2. Condenser fans serving flooded condensers.

# Multiple-Cell Heat Rejection Equipment

Multiple-cell heat rejection equipment with variable speed fan drives shall be controlled to operate the maximum number of fans.
allowed that comply with the manufacturer s re uirements for all system components and so that all fans operate at the same fan speed re uired for the instantaneous cooling duty, as opposed to staged on and off operation. The minimum fan speed shall be the minimum allowable speed of the fan drive system in accordance with the manufacturer s recommendations.

# C

Centrifugal fan open-circuit cooling towers with a combined rated capacity of 1,100 gpm (4164 L/m) or greater at 5 F (35 C) condenser water return, 85 F (2  C) condenser water supply, and 75 F (24 C) outdoor air wet-bulb temperature shall meet the energy efficiency re uirement for axial fan open-circuit cooling towers listed in T C.

# C

Centrifugal open-circuit cooling towers that are designed with inlet or discharge ducts or re uire external sound attenuation.

# C

Open-circuit cooling towers used on water-cooled chiller systems that are configured with multiple- or variable-speed condenser water pumps shall be designed so that all open-circuit cooling tower cells can be run in parallel with the larger of the flow that is produced by the smallest pump at its minimum expected flow rate or at 50 percent of the design flow for the cell.

# C

Condenser heat recovery shall be installed for heating or reheating of service hot water provided that the facility operates 24 hours a day, the total installed heat capacity of water-cooled systems exceeds 6,000,000 tu/hr (1758 kW) of heat re ection, and the design service water heating load exceeds 1,000,000 tu/h (2 3 kW).

The re uired heat recovery system shall have the capacity to provide the smaller of the following:

1. Sixty percent of the peak heat re ection load at design conditions.
2. The preheating re uired to raise the peak service hot water draw to 85 F (2  C).

1. Facilities that employ condenser heat recovery for space heating or reheat purposes with a heat recovery design exceeding 30 percent of the peak water-cooled condenser load at design conditions.

2. Facilities that provide 60 percent of their service water heating from site solar or site recovered energy or from other sources.

# C

Where heating water is used for space heating, a condenser heat recovery system shall be installed provided that all of the following are true:
# 1. The building is a Group I-2, Condition 2 occupancy.

# 2. The total design chilled water capacity for the Group I-2, Condition 2 occupancy, either air cooled or water cooled, required at cooling design conditions exceeds 3,600,000 tu/h (1100 kw) of cooling.

# 3. Simultaneous heating and cooling occurs above 60 F (16 C) outdoor air temperature.

The required heat recovery system shall have a cooling capacity that is not less than 7 percent of the total design chilled water capacity of the Group I-2, Condition 2 occupancy at peak design conditions.

1. Buildings that provide 60 percent or more of their reheat energy from on-site renewable energy or site-recovered energy.
2. Buildings in Climate Zones 5C, 6, 7 and 8.

# C R

Refrigeration equipment performance shall be determined in accordance with C and C for commercial refrigerators, freezers, refrigerator-freezers, walk-in coolers, walk-in freezers and refrigeration equipment. The energy use shall be verified through certification under an approved certification program or, where a certification program does not exist, the energy use shall be supported by data furnished by the equipment manufacturer.

Walk-in coolers and walk-in freezers regulated under federal law in accordance with Subpart R of O C R.

# C C

# C C

Refrigeration equipment, defined in O C R P, shall have an energy use in kWh/day not greater than the values of T C when tested and rated in accordance with HRI.
# Current Page

# Category Configuration

# R R R RIG R TIO

| IP T         | I          | C I IC TIO  | I Y           | R GY           | T T           | CO PTIO    | T R   |
| ------------ | ---------- | ----------- | ------------- | -------------- | ------------- | ---------- | ----- |
| 38 ( )       | 32         | VOP.RC.     | 0.64          | TDA            | Vertical open | (VOP)      | 0 (L) |
| 38 ( )       | 32         | VOP.RC.L    | 2.20          | TDA            |               |            | 6.85  |
| 38 ( )       | 32         | SVO.RC.     | 0.66          | TDA            | Semivertical  | open (SVO) | 0 (L) |
| 38 ( )       | 32         | SVO.RC.L    | 2.20          | TDA            |               |            | 6.85  |
| 38 ( )       | 32         | H O.RC.     | 0.35          | TDA            | Horizontal    | open (H O) | 0 (L) |
| 38 ( )       | 32         | H O.RC.L    | 0.55          | TDA            |               |            | 6.88  |
| Remote       | condensing | commercial  | refrigerators | Remote (RC)    | (VCT)         | 0 (L)      | 32    |
| 38 ( )       | 32         | VCT.RC.     | 0.15          | TDA            | Vertical      | closed     |       |
| transparent  |            |             | 0.4           | TDA            |               |            |       |
| 38 ( )       | 32         | VCT.RC.L    | 2.61          | HRI            |               |            |       |
| 38 ( )       | 32         | HCT.RC.     | 0.16          | TDA            | Horizontal    | closed     |       |
| transparent  |            |             | 0.13          | TDA            |               |            |       |
| 38 ( )       | 32         | HCT.RC.L    | 0.34          | TDA            |               |            | 0.26  |
| 38 ( )       | 32         | VCS.RC.     | 0.10          | V              | 0.26          |            |       |
| 38 ( )       | 32         | VCS.RC.L    | 0.21          | V              | 0.54          |            |       |
| 38 ( )       | 32         | HCS.RC.     | 0.10          | V              | 0.26          |            |       |
| 38 ( )       | 32         | HCS.RC.L    | 0.21          | V              | 0.54          |            |       |
| Service over | counter    | (SOC)       | 0.44          | TDA            |               |            | 0.11  |
| 0 (L)        | 32         | SOC.RC.L    | 0.3           | TDA            |               |            | 0.22  |
| 38 ( )       | 32         | VOP.SC.     | 1.6           | TDA            | Vertical open | (VOP)      | 0 (L) |
| 38 ( )       | 32         | VOP.SC.L    | 4.25          | TDA            |               |            | 11.82 |
| Self-        | contained  | commercial  | refrigerators | Self-contained | (SC)          | 0 (L)      | 32    |
| 38 ( )       | 32         | SVO.SC.     | 1.70          | TDA            | Semivertical  | open (SVO) |       |
| 4.5          | TDA        | 0 (L)       | 32            | SVO.SC.L       | 11.51         |            | 0.72  |
| 38 ( )       | 32         | H O.SC.     | 5.55          | TDA            | Horizontal    | open (H O) | 0 (L) |
| 38 ( )       | 32         | H O.RC.L    | 1.0           | TDA            |               |            | 7.08  |
| Vertical     | closed     | transparent | 0.10          | V              | 0.86          |            |       |
| 0 (L)        | 32         | VCT.SC.L    | 0.2           | V              | 2.5           |            |       |

|                | Vertical                                                                               | 38 ( )       | 32           | VCS.SC.  | 0.05 | V     | 1.36 |     |
| -------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------ | ------------ | -------- | ---- | ----- | ---- | --- |
|                | closed solid                                                                           | 0 (L)        | 32           | VCS.SC.L | 0.22 | V     | 1.38 |     |
|                | (VCS)                                                                                  |              |              |          |      |       |      |     |
| Horizontal     | 38 ( )                                                                                 | 32           | HCT.SC.      | 0.06     | V    | 0.37  |      |     |
| closed         | 0 (L)                                                                                  | 32           | HCT.SC.L     | 0.08     | V    | 1.23  |      |     |
|                | (HCT)                                                                                  |              |              |          |      |       |      |     |
| Horizontal     | 38 ( )                                                                                 | 32           | HCS.SC.      | 0.05     | V    | 0.1   |      |     |
|                | closed solid                                                                           | 0 (L)        | 32           | HCS.SC.L | 0.06 | V     | 1.12 |     |
|                | (HCS)                                                                                  |              |              |          |      |       |      |     |
|                | Service over                                                                           | 38 ( )       | 32           | SOC.SC.  | 0.52 | TDA   | 1.00 |     |
| counter        | 0 (L)                                                                                  | 32           | SOC.SC.L     | 1.10     | TDA  | 2.10  |      |     |
| Self-contained | commercial refrigerators with transparent doors for pull-down temperature applications |              |              |          |      |       |      |     |
| Self-contained | Pull-down                                                                              | 38 ( )       | 32           | PD.SC.   | 0.11 | V     | 0.81 | HRI |
|                | Vertical open                                                                          |              | VOP.RC.I     | 2.7      | TDA  | 8.70  |      |     |
|                | Semivertical                                                                           |              | SVO.RC.I     | 2.7      | TDA  | 8.70  |      |     |
| Horizontal     |                                                                                        |              | H O.RC.I     | 0.70     | TDA  | 8.74  |      |     |
| Vertical       | closed                                                                                 |              | VCT.RC.I     | 0.58     | TDA  | 3.05  |      |     |
| Remote (RC)    | Horizontal                                                                             | closed       | HCT.RC.I     | 0.40     | TDA  | 0.31  |      |     |
| Vertical       | Commercial                                                                             | closed solid | VCS.RC.I     | 0.25     | V    | 0.63  |      |     |
| ice cream      | freezers                                                                               | Horizontal   | closed solid | HCS.RC.I | 0.25 | V     | 0.63 |     |
|                | Service over                                                                           | counter      | SOC.RC.I     | 0.26     | TDA  | 1.0   |      |     |
|                | Vertical open                                                                          |              | VOP.SC.I     | 5.40     | TDA  | 15.02 |      |     |
|                | Semivertical                                                                           |              | SVO.SC.I     | 5.41     | TDA  | 14.63 |      |     |
| Self-contained | Horizontal                                                                             | open         | H O.SC.I     | 2.42     | TDA  | HRI   |      |     |
| Vertical       | closed                                                                                 |              | VCT.SC.I     | 0.62     | TDA  | 3.2   |      |     |

| Hori ontal closed       | HCT.SC.I | 0.56     | TDA  |   |      |
| ----------------------- | -------- | -------- | ---- | - | ---- |
| transparent             |          | 0.43     |      |   |      |
| Vertical closed solid   |          | VCS.SC.I | 0.34 | V | 0.88 |
| Hori ontal closed solid |          | HCS.SC.I | 0.34 | V | 0.88 |
| Service over counter    |          | SOC.SC.I | 0.36 |   | 1.53 |

For SI: 1 square foot = 0.092 m², 1 cubic foot = 0.02832 m³, C = (F - 32)/1.8.

1. The meaning of the letters in this column is indicated in the columns to the left.
2. Ice cream freezer is defined in DOE 10 CFR 431.62 as a commercial freezer that is designed to operate at or below -5°F and that the manufacturer designs, markets or intends for the storing, displaying or dispensing of ice cream.
3. Equipment class designations consist of a combination in sequential order separated by periods (AAA).(  ).(C) of the following:
- (AAA) An equipment family code (VOP - vertical open, SVO - semivertical open, H O - horizontal open, VCT - vertical closed transparent doors, VCS - vertical closed solid doors, HCT - horizontal closed transparent doors, HCS - horizontal closed solid doors, and SOC - service over counter)
- (  ) An operating mode code (RC - remote condensing and SC - self-contained) and
- (C) A rating temperature code - medium temperature (38°F), L - low temperature (0°F), or I - ice cream temperature (-15°F).

For example, “VOP.RC.” refers to the “vertical open, remote condensing, medium temperature” equipment class.
4. V is the volume of the case (ft³) as measured in HRI, Appendix C.
5. TDA is the total display area of the case (ft²) as measured in HRI, Appendix D.

Walk-in cooler and walk-in freezer refrigeration systems, except for walk-in process cooling refrigeration systems as defined in O C R, shall meet the requirements of T C, C, and C.

Al in coolers and al in freezers shall meet the requirements of T C, C, and C.
# Current Page

# Cryptor

| Display door, medium temperature | DD,   | 0.04 | Add | 0.41 |
| -------------------------------- | ----- | ---- | --- | ---- |
| Display door, low temperature    | DD, L | 0.15 | Add | 0.2  |

a. Add is the surface area of the display door.
# Current Page

| Passage door, medium temperature | PD,   | 0.05 | And | 1.7 |
| -------------------------------- | ----- | ---- | --- | --- |
| Passage door, low temperature    | PD, L | 0.14 | And | 4.8 |
| Freight door, medium temperature | FD,   | 0.04 | And | 1.  |
| Freight door, low temperature    | FD, L | 0.12 | And | 5.6 |

a. And is the surface area of the nondisplay door.
# Current Page

| DC. .I                                                                                | 5.61   |              |
| ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------ | ------------ |
| DC. .O                                                                                | 7.60   |              |
| Dedicated condensing, low temperature, indoor system, net capacity ( ₙₑₜ) 6,500 tu/h  | DC.L.I | 1.81         |
| Dedicated condensing, low temperature, indoor system, net capacity ( ₙₑₜ) 6,500 tu/h  | DC.L.I | 2.40         |
| Dedicated condensing, low temperature, outdoor system, net capacity ( ₙₑₜ) 6,500 tu/h | DC.L.O | 6.522 × 10⁻⁵ |
| Dedicated condensing, low temperature, outdoor system, net capacity ( ₙₑₜ) 6,500 tu/h | DC.L.O | 3.15         |
| Unit cooler, medium                                                                   | UC.    | .00          |
| Unit cooler, low temperature, net capacity ( ₙₑₜ) 15,500 tu/h                         | UC.L   | 1.575 × 10⁻⁵ |
| Unit cooler, low temperature, net capacity ( ₙₑₜ) 15,500 tu/h                         | UC.L   | 4.15         |

For SI: 1 British thermal unit per hour = 0.231 W.

a. ₙₑₜ is net capacity (tu/h) as determined in accordance with HRI.

Refrigerated display cases, all in coolers or all in freezers that are served by remote compressors and remote condensers not located in a condensing unit, shall comply with C and C.

Systems where the working fluid in the refrigeration cycle goes through both subcritical and super-critical states (transcritical) or that use ammonia refrigerant are exempt.

Fan-powered condensers shall comply with the following:

1. The design rated condensing temperatures for air-cooled condensers shall not exceed the design dry-bulb temperature plus 10°F (5.6°C) for low-temperature.
# Refrigeration Systems

Refrigeration systems, and the design dry-bulb temperature plus 15 F (8 C) for refrigerant refrigeration systems where the saturated condensing temperature for blend refrigerants shall be determined using the average of liquid and vapor temperatures as converted from the condenser drain pressure.

1. Condenser fan motors that are less than 1 hp (0.75 kW) shall use electronically commutated motors, permanent split-capacitor-type motors or 3-phase motors.
2. Condenser fans for air-cooled condensers, evaporatively cooled condensers, air- or water-cooled fluid coolers or cooling towers shall reduce fan motor demand to not more than 30 percent of design wattage at 50 percent of design air volume, and incorporate one of the following continuous variable speed fan control approaches:
1. Refrigeration system condenser control for air-cooled condensers shall use variable setpoint control logic to reset the condensing temperature setpoint in response to ambient dry-bulb temperature.
2. Refrigeration system condenser control for evaporatively cooled condensers shall use variable setpoint control logic to reset the condensing temperature setpoint in response to ambient wet-bulb temperature.
3. Multiple fan condensers shall be controlled in unison.
4. The minimum condensing temperature setpoint shall be not greater than 70 F (21 C).

# Refrigeration Compressor Systems

Refrigeration compressor systems shall comply with the following:

1. Compressors and multiple-compressor system suction groups shall include control systems that use floating suction pressure control logic to reset the target suction pressure temperature based on the temperature requirements of the attached refrigeration display cases or walk-ins.
Controls are not required for the following:

1. Single-compressor systems that do not have variable capacity capability.
2. Suction groups that have a design saturated suction temperature of 30 F (-1.1 C) or higher, suction groups that comprise the high stage of a two-stage or cascade system, or suction groups that primarily serve chillers for secondary cooling fluids.
2. Liquid subcooling shall be provided for all low-temperature compressor systems with a design cooling capacity equal to or greater than 100,000 BTU (29.3 kW) with a design-saturated suction temperature of -10 F (-23 C) or lower. The sub-cooled liquid temperature shall be controlled at a maximum temperature setpoint of 50 F (10 C) at the exit of the subcooler using either compressor economizer (interstage) ports or a separate compressor suction group operating at a saturated suction temperature of 18 F (-7.8 C) or higher.
1. Insulation for liquid lines with a fluid operating temperature less than 60 F (15.6 C) shall comply with T C.
3. Compressors that incorporate internal or external crankcase heaters shall provide a means to cycle the heaters off during compressor operation.
# Ducts, plenums, piping and other elements

that are part of an HVAC system shall be constructed and insulated in accordance with C through C.

Supply and return air ducts and plenums shall be insulated with not less than R-6 insulation where located in unconditioned spaces and where located outside the building with not less than R-8 insulation in Climate zones 0 through 4 and not less than R-12 insulation in Climate zones 5 through 8. Ducts located underground beneath buildings shall be insulated as required in this section or have an equivalent thermal distribution efficiency. Underground ducts utilizing the thermal distribution efficiency method shall be listed and labeled to indicate the R-value equivalency. Where located within a building envelope assembly, the duct or plenum shall be separated from the building exterior or unconditioned or exempt spaces by not less than R-8 insulation in Climate zones 0 through 4 and not less than R-12 insulation in Climate zones 5 through 8.

1. Where located within equipment.
2. Where the design temperature difference between the interior and exterior of the duct or plenum is not greater than 15 F (8 C).

Ducts, air handlers and filter boxes shall be sealed. Joints and seams shall comply with Section 603 of the International Mechanical Code.

# Ductwork

shall be constructed and erected in accordance with the International Mechanical Code.

Longitudinal and transverse joints, seams and connections of supply and return ducts operating at a static pressure less than or equal to 2 inches water gauge (w.g.) (4 8 Pa) shall be securely fastened and sealed with welds, gaskets, mastics (adhesives), mastic-plus-embedded-fabric systems or tapes installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. Pressure classifications specific to the duct system shall be clearly indicated on the construction documents in accordance with the International Mechanical Code.

Locking-type longitudinal joints and seams, other than the snap-lock and button-lock types, need not be sealed as specified in this section.

Ducts and plenums designed to operate at a static pressure greater than 2 inches water gauge (w.g.) (4 8 Pa) but less than 3
# Current Page

Inches w.g. (747 Pa) shall be insulated and sealed in accordance with C. Pressure classifications specific to the duct system shall be clearly indicated on the construction documents in accordance with the International Mechanical Code.

# Ducts and Plenums

Ducts and plenums designed to operate at static pressures equal to or greater than 3 inches water gauge (747 Pa) shall be insulated and sealed in accordance with C. In addition, ducts and plenums shall be leak tested in accordance with the SMACNA HVAC Air Duct Leakage Test Manual and shown to have a rate of air leakage (CL) less than or equal to 4.0 as determined in accordance with Equation 4-10.

Where:

- The measured leakage rate in cfm per 100 square feet (0.3 m²) of duct surface.
- The static pressure of the test.

Documentation shall be furnished demonstrating that representative sections totaling not less than 25 percent of the duct area have been tested and that all tested sections comply with the requirements of this section.

# Piping

Piping serving as part of a heating or cooling system shall be thermally insulated in accordance with Table C403.13.3(1) or Table C403.13.3(2).

1. Factory-installed piping within HVAC equipment tested and rated in accordance with a test procedure referenced by this code.
2. Factory-installed piping within room fan-coils and unit ventilators tested and rated according to HRI (except that the sampling and variation provisions of Section 6.5 shall not apply) and HRI, respectively.
3. Piping that conveys fluids that have a design operating temperature range between 60°F (15°C) and 105°F (41°C).
4. Piping that conveys fluids that have not been heated or cooled through the use of fossil fuels or electric power.
5. Strainers, control valves, and balancing valves associated with piping 1 inch (25 mm) or less in diameter.
6. Direct buried piping that conveys fluids at or below 60°F (15°C).
7. In radiant heating systems, sections of piping intended by design to radiate heat.
# Minimum Insulation Thickness

|     |      |      | Value  | Minimum Insulation Thickness (inches) |     |     |     |     |     |    |
| --- | ---- | ---- | ------ | ------------------------------------- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | -- |
|     |      |      | Inches | 4.5                                   | 5.0 | 5.0 | 5.0 | 5.0 |     |    |
| 350 | 0.32 | 0.34 | 250    | R32                                   | R36 | R34 | R26 | R21 |     |    |
|     |      |      | Value  | Minimum Insulation Thickness (inches) |     |     |     |     |     |    |
|     |      |      | Inches | 3.0                                   | 4.0 | 4.5 | 4.5 | 4.5 |     |    |
| 251 | 350  | 0.2  | 0.32   | 200                                   | R20 | R2  | R32 | R24 | R20 |    |
|     |      |      | Value  | Minimum Insulation Thickness (inches) |     |     |     |     |     |    |
|     |      |      | Inches | 2.5                                   | 2.5 | 2.5 | 3.0 | 3.0 |     |    |
| 201 | 250  | 0.27 | 0.30   | 150                                   | R17 | R17 | R17 | R15 | R13 |    |
|     |      |      | Value  | Minimum Insulation Thickness (inches) |     |     |     |     |     |    |
|     |      |      | Inches | 1.5                                   | 1.5 | 2.0 | 2.0 | 2.0 |     |    |
| 141 | 200  | 0.25 | 0.2    | 125                                   | R   | R   | R   | R11 | R10 | R  |
|     |      |      | Value  | Minimum Insulation Thickness (inches) |     |     |     |     |     |    |
|     |      |      | Inches | 1.0                                   | 1.0 | 1.5 | 1.5 | 1.5 |     |    |
| 105 | 140  | 0.21 | 0.28   | 100                                   | R   | R5  | R   | R8  | R8  | R7 |
|     |      |      | Value  | Minimum Insulation Thickness (inches) |     |     |     |     |     |    |
|     |      |      | Inches | 0.5                                   | 0.5 | 1.0 | 1.0 | 1.0 |     |    |
| 40  | 60   | 0.21 | 0.27   | 75                                    | R   | R2  | R2  | R5  | R5  | R4 |
|     |      |      | Value  | Minimum Insulation Thickness (inches) |     |     |     |     |     |    |
|     |      |      | Inches | 0.5                                   | 1.0 | 1.0 | 1.0 | 1.5 |     |    |
| 40  | 0.20 | 0.26 | 50     | R                                     | R6  | R   | R   | R8  | R7  |    |

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, C (F) = 32 / 1.8.

a. For piping smaller than 1½ inches and located in partitions within conditioned spaces, reduction of these thicknesses by 1 inch shall be permitted (before thickness adjustment required in Note b) but not to a thickness less than 1 inch.

b. For insulation outside the stated conductivity range, the minimum thickness (T) shall be determined as follows: where: minimum insulation thickness.
r   Actual outside radius of pipe.

t    Insulation thickness listed in the table for applicable fluid temperature and pipe size.

Conductivity of alternate material at mean rating temperature indicated for the applicable fluid temperature (tu   in/h   ft²   F).

The upper value of the conductivity range listed in the table for the applicable fluid temperature.

c.  For direct-buried heating and hot water system piping, reduction of these thicknesses by 1¹/₂ inches (38 mm) shall be permitted (before thickness adjustment required in Note b but not to thicknesses less than 1 inch.
# FLUID OPERATING TEMPERATURE RANGE AND USAGE (°F)

| NO INAL PIPE OR TUBE SIZE (inches) | 1 1/2 TO 4 TO 8 |     |     |     |     |     |
| ---------------------------------- | --------------- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|                                    |                 |     | 1/2 | 4   | 8   |     |
| Minimum Insulation R-Value         | 350             | R32 | R36 | R34 | R26 | R21 |
| 251-350                            | R20             | R2  | R32 | R24 | R20 |     |
| 201-250                            | R17             | R17 | R17 | R15 | R13 |     |
| 141-200                            | R               | R   | R11 | R10 | R   |     |
| 105-140                            | R5              | R   | R8  | R8  | R7  |     |
| 40-60                              | R2              | R2  | R5  | R5  | R4  |     |
| 40                                 | R6              | R   | R   | R8  | R7  |     |

For SI: R-1 RSI-0.176228, C (°F)-32 /1.8.

a. The R-value of cylindrical piping insulation shall be determined as follows:

R = (ro(ln(ro/ri)))/k

where:

- R = The interior R-value of the cylindrical piping insulation in tu x ft² x °F/h
- ro = The outer radius of the piping insulation in inches
- ri = The inner radius of the piping insulation in inches
- k = the thermal conductivity of the insulation material in tu x in/h x ft² x °F

Piping insulation exposed to the weather shall be protected from physical damage, including that caused by sunlight, moisture, equipment maintenance and wind. The protection shall provide shielding from solar radiation that can cause degradation of the material. The protection shall be removable and reusable for not less than 6 inches (150 mm) from the connection to the equipment piping for maintenance. Adhesive tape shall not be permitted as a means of insulation protection.

Mechanical systems providing heat outside of the thermal envelope of a building shall comply with C through C.
# Systems installed to provide heat outside a building

shall be radiant systems. Such heating systems shall be controlled by an occupancy sensing device or a timer switch, so that the system is automatically de-energized when occupants are not present.

# Snow- and ice-melting systems

shall include automatic controls configured to shut off the system when the pavement temperature is above 50 F (10 C) and precipitation is not falling, and an automatic or manual control that is configured to shut off when the outdoor temperature is above 40 F (4 C).

# Roof and gutter deicing systems

including but not limited to self-regulating cable, shall include automatic controls that are configured to shut off the system when the outdoor temperature is above 40 F (4 C) and that include one of the following:

1. A moisture sensor configured to shut off the system in the absence of moisture, or
2. A daylight sensor or other means configured to shut off the system between sunset and sunrise.

# Freezing protection systems

such as heat tracing of outdoor piping and heat exchangers, including self-regulating heat tracing, shall include automatic controls configured to shut off the systems when outdoor air temperatures are above 40 F (4 C) or when the conditions of the protected fluid will prevent freezing.

# This section covers the minimum efficiency of, and controls for, service water-heating equipment and insulation of service hot water piping.

Water-heating equipment and hot water storage tanks shall meet the requirements of T C . The efficiency shall be
verified through data furnished by the manufacturer of the equipment or through certification under an approved certification program. Water-heating equipment intended to be used to provide space heating shall meet the applicable provisions of T C.
| T C                            | EQUIPMENT TYPE                       | CATEGORY | DRAW OR RATING | PERFORMANCE PATTERN | TEST PROCEDURE             |
| ------------------------------ | ------------------------------------ | -------- | -------------- | ------------------- | -------------------------- |
| I I P R OR C O T R H TI G IP T | SI E SU CONDITION                    |          |                |                     |                            |
|                                | Electric Table-top water heaters     | 20 gal   | 120            | small               | UEF 0.6323                 |
|                                |                                      |          | Low            | (0.0058 Vr)         | DOE 10 CFR Part 430 App. E |
|                                |                                      |          | Medium         | UEF 0.188           |                            |
|                                |                                      |          | High           | (0.0031 Vr)         |                            |
|                                |                                      |          | Very           | (0.0023 Vr)         |                            |
|                                |                                      |          | UEF 0.884      | (0.0016 Vr)         |                            |
|                                |                                      |          | UEF 0.8808     | (0.0008 Vr)         |                            |
|                                | Electric Storage water heaters       | 12 kW    | 20 gal         | 55 gal              | Low                        |
|                                |                                      |          | Medium         | UEF 0.307           | DOE 10 CFR Part 430 App. E |
|                                |                                      |          | High           | (0.0002 Vr)         |                            |
|                                |                                      |          | UEF 0.34       | (0.0001 Vr)         |                            |
|                                |                                      |          | UEF 1.236      | (0.0011 Vr)         |                            |
|                                | Grid-enabled water heaters           | 12 kW    | -              | -                   | (0.3 27/Vm), h             |
|                                |                                      |          | UEF 1.0136     | (0.0028 Vr)         | DOE 10 CFR 431.106 App     |
|                                |                                      |          | Very           | small               | UEF 0.84                   |
|                                |                                      |          | Low            | (0.0014 Vr)         | 10 CFR 430 Appendix E      |
|                                |                                      |          | Medium         | UEF 0.853           |                            |
|                                |                                      |          | High           | (0.0010 Vr)         |                            |
|                                |                                      |          | UEF 0.720      | (0.0007 Vr)         |                            |
|                                | Electric Instantaneous water heaters | 12 kW    | 2 gal          | small               | UEF 0.1                    |
|                                |                                      |          | Low            | UEF 0.1             | DOE 10 CFR Part 430        |
|                                |                                      |          | Medium         | UEF 0.2             |                            |
|                                |                                      |          | High           |                     |                            |
|                                | Electric                             | 12 kW    | 2 gal          | 180 F               | All                        |
|                                |                                      |          | UEF 0.80       | DOE 10 CFR Part 430 |                            |

# Gas Storage Water Heaters

|                | 75,000        | 20 gal  | 55          | small              | UEF 0.5                    | 82                    | DOE 10 CFR Part 430 App. E |
| -------------- | ------------- | ------- | ----------- | ------------------ | -------------------------- | --------------------- | -------------------------- |
|                |               |         | Low         | (0.001 Vr)         | Medium                     | UEF 0.6483            |                            |
|                |               |         | High        | (0.0017 Vr)        | UEF 0.6                    | (0.0013 Vr)           |                            |
|                |               |         | Very        | (0.0006 Vr)        | 75,000                     | 55 gal                |                            |
|                |               | 100     | small       | UEF 0.768          | DOE 10 CFR Part 430 App. E |                       |                            |
|                |               |         | Low         | (0.0005 Vr)        | Medium                     | UEF 0.787             |                            |
|                |               |         | High        | (0.0004 Vr)        | UEF 0.8072                 |                       |                            |
|                |               |         | Gas Storage | water heatersᵉ     | (0.0003 Vr)                | UEF 0.2674-0.000 x Vr |                            |
| 75,000         | 120 gal       |         | small       | 0.5362-0.0012 x Vr | DOE 10 CFR Part 430 App. E |                       |                            |
|                |               |         | Low         | 0.6002-0.0011 x Vr | UEF                        | 0.657-0.000 x Vr      |                            |
|                | 105,000       | -       | -           | 80                 | Et                         | DOE 10 CFR 431.106    | ( /800 110 V), tu/h        |
| 50,000         | 2 galᵈ        |         | small       | UEF 0.80           | DOE 10 CFR Part 430 App. E |                       |                            |
|                |               |         | Low         | UEF 0.81           | Medium                     | UEF 0.81              |                            |
|                |               |         | High        |                    |                            |                       |                            |
| Instantaneousi | water heaters | 200,000 | tu/hᵏ       | 10 gal             | -                          | 80 Et                 |                            |
|                | 200,000       | 10 gal  | -           | 80 Et              |                            | 431.106               | ( /800 110 V), tu/h        |

# Oil Storage Water Heaters

| 105,000 tu/h | 50 gal  | Very small | UEF 0.5330             | Low (0.0016 Vr)            |
| ------------ | ------- | ---------- | ---------------------- | -------------------------- |
|              |         | Medium     | UEF 0.6078             | High (0.0016 Vr)           |
|              |         |            | UEF 0.6815             | (0.0014 Vr)                |
| 105,000 tu/h | 120 gal | Very small | UEF 0.556-0.0018 x Vr  | Low                        |
|              |         | Medium     | UEF                    | High 0.614-0.0016 x Vr     |
|              |         |            | UEF 0.6740-0.0013 x Vr |                            |
| 140,000 tu/h | All     | -          | 80 Et                  | DOE 10 CFR 431.106         |
| 210,000 tu/h | 2 gal   | -          | 80 Et                  | DOE 10 CFR Part 430 App. E |

# Oil Instantaneous Water Heaters

| 210,000 tu/h | 10 gal | - | 80 Et | DOE 10 CFR 431.106 |
| ------------ | ------ | - | ----- | ------------------ |
| 210,000 tu/h | 10 gal | - | 78 Et | DOE 10 CFR 431.106 |

# Hot Water Supply Boilers, Gas and Oil

| 300,000 tu/h | 10 gal | - | 80 Et            | DOE 10 CFR 431.106 |
| ------------ | ------ | - | ---------------- | ------------------ |
| 300,000 tu/h | 10 gal | - | SL ( /800 110 V) | DOE 10 CFR 431.106 |
| 300,000 tu/h | 10 gal | - | 78 Et            | DOE 10 CFR 431.106 |

# Pool Heaters, Gas

| All | f | - | 82 Et | DOE 10 CFR Part 430 App. P |
| --- | - | - | ----- | -------------------------- |

# Heat pump pool heaters

| All | wb outdoor air | - | 4.0 COP | DOE 10 CFR Part 430 App. |
| --- | -------------- | - | ------- | ------------------------ |

# Unfired storage tanks

| All | - | - | insulation requirement | (none) |
| --- | - | - | ---------------------- | ------ |

Minimum R-12.5 (h-ft²-F)/tu

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 square foot = 0.092 m², °C (°F) = (32 - 1.8), 1 British thermal unit per hour = 0.293 W, 1 gallon = 3.785 L, 1 British thermal unit per hour per gallon = 0.078 W/L.

1. Thermal efficiency (Et) is a minimum requirement, while standby loss is a maximum requirement. In the standby loss evaluation, V is the rated volume in gallons and Q is the nameplate input rate in BTU/h. Vm is the measured volume in the tank in gallons. Standby loss for electric water heaters is in terms of BTU/h and denoted by the term “S,” and standby loss for gas and oil water heaters is in terms of BTU/h and denoted by the term “SL.” Draw pattern (DP) refers to the water draw profile in the Uniform Energy Factor (UEF) test. UEF and Energy Factor (EF) are minimum requirements. In the UEF standard equations, Vr refers to the rated volume in gallons.
2. Chapter 6 contains a complete specification, including the year version, of the referenced test procedure.
3. A tabletop water heater is a storage water heater that is enclosed in a rectangular cabinet with a flat top surface not more than three feet (0.1 m) in height and has a ratio of input capacity (BTU/h) to tank volume (gal) of 4000.
4. Water heaters or gas pool heaters in this category are regulated as consumer products by the USDOE as defined in 10 CFR 430.
5. Storage water heaters have a ratio of input capacity (BTU/h) to tank volume (gal) of 4000.
6. Efficiency requirements for electric storage water heaters of 12 kW apply to both electric resistance and heat pump water heaters. There are no minimum efficiency requirements for electric heat pump water heaters greater than 12 kW or for gas heat pump water heaters.
7. A grid-enabled water heater is an electric resistance water heater that meets all of the following:
1. Has a rated storage tank volume of more than 75 gallons (284 L).
2. Is manufactured on or after April 16, 2015.
3. Is equipped at the point of manufacture with an activation lock.
4. Bears a permanent label applied by the manufacturer that complies with all of the following:
1. Is made of material not adversely affected by water.
2. Is attached by means of non-water soluble adhesive.
3. Advises purchasers and end-users of the intended and appropriate use of the product with the following notice printed in 16.5 point Arial Narrow bold font: IMPORTANT INFORMATION: This water heater is intended only for use as a part of an electric thermal storage or demand response program. It will not provide adequate hot water unless enrolled in such a program and activated by your utility company or another program operator. Confirm the availability of a program in your local area before purchasing or installing this product.
8. Instantaneous water heaters and hot water supply boilers have an input capacity (BTU/h) divided by storage volume (gal) of 4000 BTU/h-gal.
9. Electric instantaneous water heaters with input capacity of 12 kW and 58.6 kW that have either (1) a storage volume of 2 gal (7.6 L) or (2) are designed to provide outlet hot water at temperatures greater than 180 °F (82 °C) or (3) use three-phase power have no efficiency standard.
Gas storage water heaters with input capacity 75,000 tu/h (21.8 kW) and 105,000 tu/h (30.77 kW) must comply with the requirements for the 105,000 tu/h (30.77 kW) if the water heater either (1) has a storage volume 120 gal (454L) (2) is designed to provide outlet hot water at temperatures greater than 180 F (82 C) or (3) uses three-phase power.

Refer to Section C404.2.1 for additional requirements for gas storage and instantaneous water heaters and gas hot-water supply boilers.

Oil storage water heaters with input capacity 105,000 tu/h (30.77 kW) and 140,000 tu/h (41.03 kW) must comply with the requirements for the 140,000 tu/h (41.03 kW) if the water heater either (1) has a storage volume 120 gal (454L) (2) is designed to provide outlet hot water at temperatures greater than 180 F (82 C) or (3) uses three-phase power.

# C H

# C H

Gas-fired service water-heating equipment installed in new buildings where the total input capacity provided by high-capacity service water heating equipment is 1,000,000 tu/h (23 kW) or greater shall be in compliance with either or both of the following requirements.

1. Where a singular piece of high-capacity gas-fired service water-heating equipment is installed, such equipment shall have a thermal efficiency, Et, of not less than 2 percent.
2. Where multiple pieces of high-capacity gas-fired service water-heating equipment are connected to the same service water-heating system, the combined input-capacity-weighted-average thermal efficiency, Et, shall not be less than 0 percent and a minimum of 30 percent of the input to the gas-fired equipment in the service water-heating system shall have a thermal efficiency of not less than 2 percent.

High-capacity gas-fired service water-heating equipment is comprised of gas-fired instantaneous water heaters with a rated input both greater than 200,000 tu/h (58.6 kW) and not less than 4,000 tu/h per gallon (310 W per litre) of stored water, and gas-fired storage water heaters with a rated input both greater than 105,000 tu/h (30.8 kW) and less than 4,000 tu/h per gallon (310 W per litre) of stored water.

1. The input rating of water heaters installed in individual dwelling units shall not be required to be included in the total input rating of service water-heating equipment for a building.
2. The input rating of water heaters with an input rating of not greater than 105,000 tu/h (30.8 kW) shall not be required to be included in the total input rating of service water-heating equipment for a building.

# C H

# C H

Storage tank-type water heaters and hot water storage tanks that have vertical water pipes connecting to the inlet and outlet of the tank shall be provided with integral heat traps at those inlets and outlets or shall have pipe-configured heat traps in the piping connected to those inlets and outlets. Tank inlets and outlets associated with solar water heating system circulation loops shall not be required to have heat traps.

# C

# C

Service water heating system piping
shall be surrounded by uncompressed insulation. The wall thickness of the insulation shall be not less than the thickness shown in Table C404.4.1. Where the insulation thermal conductivity is not within the range in the table, the following equation shall be used to calculate the minimum insulation thickness:

| t      | alt                                                                                                                      | minimum insulation thickness of the alternate material (in.) (mm) |   |
| ------ | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ | ----------------------------------------------------------------- | - |
| r      | actual outside radius of pipe (in.) (mm)                                                                                 |                                                                   |   |
| ttable | insulation thickness listed in this table for applicable fluid temperature and pipe size                                 |                                                                   |   |
| kₐₗₜ   | thermal conductivity of the alternate material at mean rating temperature indicated for the applicable fluid temperature |                                                                   |   |
| kupper | the upper value of the thermal conductivity range listed in this table for the applicable fluid temperature              |                                                                   |   |

For nonmetallic piping thicker than Schedule 80 and having thermal resistance greater than that of steel pipe, reduced insulation thicknesses are permitted if documentation is provided showing that the pipe with the proposed insulation has no more heat transfer per foot (meter) than a steel pipe of the same size with the insulation thickness shown in the table.

Tubular pipe insulation shall not be required on the following:

1. Factory-installed piping within water heaters and hot water storage tanks.
2. Valves, pumps, and strainers in piping that is not greater than 1 inch (25 mm) in nominal diameter.
3. Piping that conveys hot water that has not been heated through the use of fossil fuels or electricity.
4. Piping from user-controlled shower and bath mixing valves to the water outlets.
5. Cold-water piping of a demand recirculation water system.
6. Piping in existing buildings where alterations are made to existing service water heating systems where there is insufficient space or access to meet the requirements.
7. Piping at locations where a vertical support of the piping is installed.
8. Where piping passes through a framing member if it requires increasing the size of the framing member.

The following piping shall be insulated per the requirements of this section:

1. Recirculating system piping, including the supply and return piping.
2. The first 8 feet (2.4m) of outlet piping from:
1. Storage water heaters.
2. Hot water storage tanks.
3. Any water heater and hot water supply boiler containing not less than 10 gallons (37. L) of water heated by a direct heat source, an indirect heat source, or both a direct heat source and an indirect heat source.
3. The first 8 feet (2.4m) of branch piping connecting to recirculated, heat traced, or impedance heated piping.
4. The make-up water inlet piping between heat traps and the storage water heaters.
the storage tanks they are serving, nonrecirculating service water heating storage-system.

1. Hot water piping between multiple water heaters, between multiple hot water storage tanks, and between water heaters and hot water storage tanks.
2. Piping that is externally heated (such as heat trace or impedance heating).
3. For direct-buried service water heating system piping, reduction of these thicknesses by 1.5 inches (38.1 mm) shall be permitted (before thickness adjustment required in Section C404.4) but not to thicknesses less than 1 in (25.4 mm).
# T C

# Insulation Thermal Conductivity

| Service Hot-water Temperature Range | Conductivity, Btu in/h ft2 °F | Mean Rating Temperature, °F | Insulation Thickness, in. |
| ----------------------------------- | ----------------------------- | --------------------------- | ------------------------- |
| 105 F to 140 F                      | 0.22 to 0.28                  | 100                         | 1.0                       |
|                                     |                               |                             | 1.0                       |
|                                     |                               |                             | 1.5                       |
|                                     |                               |                             | 1.5                       |
|                                     |                               |                             | 1.5                       |
| 140 F to 200 F                      | 0.25 to 0.2                   | 125                         | 1.0                       |
|                                     |                               |                             | 1.0                       |
|                                     |                               |                             | 2.0                       |
|                                     |                               |                             | 2.0                       |
|                                     |                               |                             | 2.0                       |
| 200 F                               | 0.27 to 0.30                  | 150                         | 1.5                       |
|                                     |                               |                             | 1.5                       |
|                                     |                               |                             | 2.5                       |
|                                     |                               |                             | 3.0                       |
|                                     |                               |                             | 3.0                       |

a. These thicknesses are based on energy efficiency considerations only. Additional insulation may be necessary for safety.

# C H

Heated water supply piping shall be in accordance with C or C. The flow rate through 1/4-inch (6.4 mm) piping shall be not greater than 0.5 gpm (1. L/m). The flow rate through 5/16-inch (7. mm) piping shall be not greater than 1 gpm (3.8 L/m). The flow rate through 3/8-inch (9.5 mm) piping shall be not greater than 1.5 gpm (5.7 L/m).

# C

The maximum allowable piping length from the nearest source of heated water to the termination of the fixture supply pipe shall be in accordance with the following. Where the piping contains more than one size of pipe, the largest size of pipe within the piping shall be used for determining the maximum allowable length of the piping in T C.

1. For a public lavatory faucet, use the “Public lavatory faucets” column in T C.
2. For all other plumbing fixtures and plumbing appliances, use the “Other fixtures and appliances” column in T C.
# Water Volume Calculation

| PIPI G      | O    | PIPI G | GTH |
| ----------- | ---- | ------ | --- |
| 1/4         | 0.33 | 6      | 50  |
| 5/16        | 0.5  | 4      | 50  |
| 3/8         | 0.75 | 3      | 50  |
| 1/2         | 1.5  | 2      | 43  |
| 5/8         | 2    | 1      | 32  |
| 3/4         | 3    | 0.5    | 21  |
| 7/8         | 4    | 0.5    | 16  |
| 1           | 5    | 0.5    | 13  |
| 1¹/₄        | 8    | 0.5    | 8   |
| 1¹/₂        | 11   | 0.5    | 6   |
| 2 or larger | 18   | 0.5    | 4   |

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 liquid ounce = 0.030 L, 1 gallon = 128 ounces.

The water volume in the piping shall be calculated in accordance with the specifications. Water heaters, circulating water systems and heat trace temperature maintenance systems shall be considered to be sources of heated water.

The volume from the nearest source of heated water to the termination of the fixture supply pipe shall be as follows:

1. For a public lavatory faucet: not more than 2 ounces (0.06 L).
2. For other plumbing fixtures or plumbing appliances: not more than 0.5 gallon (1.8 L).

The volume shall be the sum of the internal volumes of pipe, fittings, valves, meters and manifolds between the nearest source of heated water and the termination of the fixture supply pipe. The volume in the piping shall be determined from the “Volume” column in the table or from the specifications.

The volume contained within fixture shutoff valves, within flexible water supply connectors to a fixture fitting and within a fixture fitting shall not be included in the water volume determination. Where heated water is supplied by a recirculating system or heat-traced piping, the volume shall include the portion of the fitting on the branch pipe that supplies water to the fixture.
# Current Page

|      |       |       |       | T    | C     |       |       |       |       |
| ---- | ----- | ----- | ----- | ---- | ----- | ----- | ----- | ----- | ----- |
| 3/8  | 1.06  | 0.7   | 0.84  | N/A  | 1.17  | 0.64  | 0.63  | 0.64  |       |
| 1/2  | 1.6   | 1.55  | 1.45  | 1.25 | 1.8   | 1.46  | 1.18  | 1.31  | 1.18  |
| 3/4  | 3.43  | 3.22  | 2.0   | 2.67 | 3.38  | 2.74  | 2.35  | 3.3   | 2.35  |
| 1    | 5.81  | 5.4   | 5.17  | 4.43 | 5.53  | 4.57  | 3.1   | 5.56  | 3.1   |
| 1¹/₄ | 8.70  | 8.36  | 8.0   | 6.61 | .66   | 8.24  | 5.81  | 8.4   | 5.81  |
| 1¹/₂ | 12.18 | 11.83 | 11.45 | .22  | 13.20 | 11.38 | 8.0   | 13.88 | 8.0   |
| 2    | 21.08 | 20.58 | 20.04 | 15.7 | 21.88 | 1.11  | 13.86 | 21.48 | 13.86 |

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 liquid ounce = 0.030 L, 1 oz/ft² = 305.15 g/m².

N/A = Not Available.

# Heated-water circulation systems

Heated-water circulation systems shall be in accordance with C. Heat trace temperature maintenance systems shall be in accordance with C. Controls for hot water storage shall be in accordance with C. Automatic controls, temperature sensors and pumps shall be in a location with access. Manual controls shall be in a location with ready access.

Heated-water circulation systems shall be provided with a circulation pump. Gravity and thermo-syphon circulation systems are prohibited. The system return pipe shall be a dedicated return pipe. Controls shall be configured to automatically turn off the pump when the water in the circulation loop is at the desired temperature and when there is not a demand for hot water. Where a circulation pump serves multiple risers or piping zones, controls shall include self-actuating thermostatic balancing valves or another means of flow control to automatically balance the flow rate through each riser or piping zone.

# Demand recirculation water systems

Demand recirculation water systems shall have controls that start the pump upon receiving a signal from the action of a user of a fixture or appliance, sensing the presence of a user of a fixture, or sensing the flow of hot or tempered water to a fixture fitting or appliance.
# Electric Heat Trace Systems

Electric heat trace systems shall comply with I. Controls for such systems shall be able to automatically adjust the energy input to the heat tracing to maintain the desired water temperature in the piping in accordance with the times when heated water is used in the occupancy. Heat trace shall be arranged to be turned off automatically when there is not a demand for hot water.

# Pump Controls

The controls on pumps that circulate water between a water heater and a heated-water storage tank shall limit operation of the pump from heating cycle startup to not greater than 5 minutes after the end of the cycle.

# Drain Water Heat Recovery Units

Drain water heat recovery units shall comply with C. Potable water-side pressure loss shall be less than 10 psi (6 kPa) at maximum design flow. For residential occupancies, the efficiency of drain water heat recovery unit efficiency shall be in accordance with C.

# Energy Consumption of Pools and Spas

The energy consumption of pools and permanent spas shall be controlled by the requirements in C through C.

# Heater Controls

The electric power to all heaters shall be controlled by an on-off switch that is an integral part of the heater, mounted on the exterior of the heater, or external to and within 3 feet (14 mm) of the heater in a location with ready access. Operation of such switch shall not change the setting of the heater thermostat. Such switches shall be in addition to a circuit breaker for the power to the heater. Gas-fired heaters shall not be equipped with continuously burning ignition pilots.

# Time Switches

Time switches or other control methods that can automatically turn off and on heaters and pump motors according to a preset schedule shall be installed for heaters and pump motors. Heaters and pump motors that have built-in time switches shall be in compliance with this section.

1. Where public health standards require 24-hour pump operation.
2. Pumps that operate solar- and waste-heat-recovery pool heating systems.
Outdoor heated pools and outdoor permanent spas shall be provided with a vapor-retardant cover or other approved vapor-retardant means. Where more than 75 percent of the energy for heating, computed over an operating season of not fewer than 3 calendar months, is from a heat pump or an on-site renewable energy system, covers or other vapor-retardant means shall not be required.

The energy consumption of electric-powered portable spas shall be controlled by the requirements of PP.

Electric storage water heaters with a rated water storage volume of 40 gallons (150L) to 120 gallons (450L) and a nameplate input rating equal to or less than 12kW shall be provided with demand responsive controls in accordance with Table C404.10 or another equivalent approved standard.

1. Water heaters that provide a hot water delivery temperature of 180 F (82 C) or greater.
2. Water heaters that comply with Section IV, Part HLW or Section of the ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code.
3. Water heaters that use 3-phase electric power.
# Equipment Controls

| Type                           | Manufactured before 7/1/2025                                                                                                                   | Manufactured on or after 7/1/2025                                                                     |
| ------------------------------ | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Electric storage water heaters | ANSI/CTA-2045- Level 1 and also capable of initiating water heating to meet the temperature set point in response to a demand response signal. | ANSI/CTA-2045- Level 2, except “Price Stream Communication” functionality as defined in the standard. |

# Electrical Power and Lighting Systems

Electrical power and lighting systems and generation shall comply with this section. Lighting units shall comply with C and with C. General lighting shall consist of all lighting included when calculating the total connected interior lighting power in accordance with C and which does not require specific application controls in accordance with C.

No less than 10 percent of the permanently installed lighting serving sleeping units and dwelling units shall be provided by lamps with an efficacy of not less than 65 lm/W or luminaires with an efficacy of not less than 45 lm/W.

1. Lighting integral to a kitchen appliance or exhaust hood.
2. Antimicrobial lighting used for the sole purpose of disinfecting.

Lighting systems powered through the energy service for the building shall be provided with controls that comply with Sections C405.2.1 through C405.2.

# Exceptions

Lighting controls are not required for the following:

1. Spaces where an automatic shutoff could endanger occupant safety or security.
2. Interior exit stairways, interior exit ramps and exit passageways.
3. Emergency lighting that is automatically off during normal operations.
4. Emergency lighting required by the International Building Code in exit access components which are not provided with fire alarm systems.
5. Up to 0.02 watts per square foot (0.06 W/m²) of lighting in exit access components which are provided with fire alarm systems.
# Occupant Sensor Controls

Occupant sensor controls shall be installed to control lights in the following space types:

1. Classrooms/lecture/training rooms.
2. Conference/meeting/multipurpose rooms.
3. Copy/print rooms.
4. Lounges/breakrooms.
5. Enclosed offices.
6. Open plan office areas.
7. Restrooms.
8. Storage rooms.
9. Locker rooms.
10. Corridors.
11. Warehouse storage areas.
12. Other spaces 300 square feet (28 m²) or less that are enclosed by floor-to-ceiling height partitions.

Luminaires that are required to have specific application controls in accordance with C.

Occupant sensor controls in warehouses shall comply with C. Occupant sensor controls in open plan office areas shall comply with C. Occupant sensor controls in corridors shall comply with C. Occupant sensor controls for all other spaces specified in C shall comply with the following:

1. They shall automatically turn off lights within 20 minutes after all occupants have left the space.
2. They shall be manual on or controlled to automatically turn on the lighting to not more than 50-percent power.
3. They shall incorporate a manual control to allow occupants to turn off lights.

Full automatic-on controls with no manual control shall be permitted in corridors, interior parking areas, stairways, restrooms, locker rooms, lobbies, library stacks and areas where manual operation would endanger occupant safety or security.

# Lighting in Warehouse Storage Areas

Lighting in warehouse storage areas shall be controlled as follows:

1. Lighting in each aisleway shall be controlled independently of lighting in all other aisleways and open areas.
2. Occupant sensors shall automatically reduce lighting power within each controlled area to an unoccupied setpoint of not more than 50 percent of full power within 20 minutes after all occupants have left the controlled area.
3. Lights that are not turned off by occupant sensors shall be turned off by time-switch control complying with C.
4. A manual control shall be provided to allow occupants to turn off lights in the space.
# Occupant Sensor Controls

Occupant sensor controls in open plan office spaces less than 300 square feet (28 m²) in area shall comply with C. Occupant sensor controls in all other open plan office spaces shall comply with all of the following:

1. The controls shall be configured so that general lighting can be controlled separately in control zones with floor areas not greater than 600 square feet (55 m²) within the open plan office space.
2. General lighting in each control zone shall be permitted to automatically turn on upon occupancy within the control zone. General lighting in other unoccupied zones within the open plan office space shall be permitted to turn on to not more than 20 percent of full power or remain unaffected.
3. The controls shall automatically turn off general lighting in all control zones within 20 minutes after all occupants have left the open plan office space. Where general lighting is turned off by time-switch control complying with C.
4. General lighting in each control zone shall turn off or uniformly reduce lighting power to an unoccupied setpoint of not more than 20 percent of full power within 20 minutes after all occupants have left the control zone.

# Occupant Sensor Controls in Corridors

Occupant sensor controls in corridors shall uniformly reduce lighting power to an occupied setpoint not more than 50 percent of full power within 20 minutes after all occupants have left the space. Corridors provided with less than two footcandles of illumination on the floor at the darkest point with all lights on.

# Time-Switch Controls

Each area of the building that is not provided with occupant sensor controls complying with C shall be provided with time switch controls complying with C.

1. Luminaires that are required to have specific application controls in accordance with C.
2. Spaces where patient care is directly provided.

# Time-Switch Controls Compliance

Time-switch controls shall comply with all of the following:

1. Automatically turn off lights when the space is scheduled to be unoccupied.
2. Have a minimum 7-day clock.
3. Be capable of being set for seven different day types per week.
# 4.

Incorporate an automatic holiday “shutoff” feature, which turns off all controlled lighting loads for not fewer than 24 hours and then resumes normally scheduled operations.

# 5.

Have program backup capabilities, which prevent the loss of program and time settings for not fewer than 10 hours, if power is interrupted.

# 6.

Include an override switch that complies with the following:

# 6.1.

The override switch shall be a manual control.

# 6.2.

The override switch, when initiated, shall permit the controlled lighting to remain on for not more than 2 hours.

# 6.3.

Any individual override switch shall control the lighting for an area not larger than 5,000 square feet (465 m²).

Within mall concourses, auditoriums, sales areas, manufacturing facilities and sports arenas:

1. The time limit shall be permitted to be greater than 2 hours, provided that the switch is a captive key device.
2. The area controlled by the override switch shall not be limited to 5,000 square feet (465 m²) provided that such area is less than 20,000 square feet (1860 m²).

# C

Dimming controls complying with Section C405.2.3.1 are required for general lighting in the following space types:

1. Classroom / lecture hall / training room.
2. Conference / multipurpose / meeting room.
3. In a dining area for bar/lounge or leisure, family dining.
4. Laboratory.
5. Lobby.
6. Lounge/ break room.
7. Offices.
8. Gymnasium/ fitness center.
9. Library reading room.
10. In a health care facility for imaging rooms, exam rooms, nursery, and nurses station.
11. Spaces not provided with occupant sensor controls complying with Section C405.2.1.1.

Luminaires controlled by special application controls complying with C.

# C

Spaces required to have dimming control shall be provided with manual controls that allow lights to be dimmed from full output to 10 percent of full power or lower with continuous dimming, as well as turning lights off. Manual control shall be provided within each room to dim lights.

Manual dimming control is not required where lighting controls have a high-end trim setting and have undergone functional testing in accordance with Section C408.3.1.4.
C

C aylig t res onsive  ontrols complying with C shall be provided to control the general lighting within daylig t  ones in the following spaces:

1. Spaces with a total of more than 75 watts of general lig ting within primary sidelit daylight ones complying with C.
2. Spaces with a total of more than 150 watts of general lig ting within sidelit daylight ones complying with C.
3. Spaces with a total of more than 75 watts of general lig ting within toplit daylight ones complying with C.

Daylight responsive controls are not re uired for the following:

1. Spaces in health care facilities where patient care is directly provided.
2. Sidelit daylight ones on the first floor above grade in Group A-2 and Group occupancies.
3. Enclosed office spaces less than 250 s uare feet (23.2 m²).

C

C Where re uired, daylig t res onsive controls shall be provided within each space for control of lights in that space and shall comply with all of the following:

1. Lights in to lit daylig t ones in accordance with C shall be controlled independently of lights in sidelit daylight ones in accordance with C.
2. Lights in the primary sidelit daylight one shall be controlled independently of lights in the secondary sidelit daylight one.
3. Daylig t res onsive controls within each space shall be configured so that they can be calibrated from within that space by authori ed personnel.
4. Calibration mechanisms shall be in a location with ready a  ess.
5. Daylig t res onsive controls shall dim lights continuously from full light output to 15 percent of full light output or lower.
6. Daylig t res onsive controls shall be configured to completely shut off all controlled lights.
7. When occupant sensor controls have reduced the lighting power to an unoccupied setpoint in accordance with C through C, daylight responsive controls shall continue to ad ust electric light levels in response to available daylight, but shall be configured to not increase the lighting power above the specified unoccupied setpoint.
8. Lights in sidelit daylig t ones in accordance with C facing different cardinal orientations within 45 degrees (0.7 rad) of due north, east, south, west shall be controlled independently of each other.
# Current Page

The sidelit daylight one is the floor area adjacent to vertical fenestration that complies with all of the following:

1. Where the fenestration is located in a wall, the primary sidelit daylight one shall extend laterally to the nearest full-height wall, or up to 1.0 times the height from the floor to the top of the fenestration, and longitudinally from the edge of the fenestration to the nearest full-height wall, or up to 0.5 times the height from the floor to the top of the fenestration, whichever is less, as indicated in C.
2. Where the fenestration is located in a rooftop monitor, the primary sidelit daylight one shall extend laterally to the nearest obstruction that is taller than 0.7 times the ceiling height, or up to 1.0 times the height from the floor to the bottom of the fenestration, whichever is less, and longitudinally from the edge of the fenestration to the nearest obstruction that is taller than 0.7 times the ceiling height, or up to 0.25 times the height from the floor to the bottom of the fenestration, whichever is less, as indicated in C and C.
3. Where the fenestration is located in a wall the secondary sidelit daylight one is directly adjacent to the primary sidelit daylight one and shall extend laterally to 2.0 times the height from the floor to the top of the fenestration or to the nearest full height wall, whichever is less, and longitudinally from the edge of the fenestration to the nearest full height wall, or up to 0.5 times the height from the floor to the top of the fenestration, whichever is less, as indicated in C.
4. The area of the fenestration is not less than 24 square feet (2.23 m²).
5. The distance from the fenestration to any building or geological formation that would block access to daylight is greater than one-half of the height from the bottom of the fenestration to the top of the building or geologic formation.
6. The visible transmittance of the fenestration is not less than 0.20.
7. The projection factor (determined in accordance with) for any overhanging projection that is shading the fenestration is not greater than 1.0 for fenestration oriented 45 degrees or less from true north and not greater than 1.5 for all other orientations.
# IG R C

# PRI RY CO RY I IT Y IGHT O

# IG R C

# Y IGHT O R ROO TOP O ITOR

# IG R C

# Y IGHT O R OP ROO TOP O ITOR

The to lit daylig t one is the floor area underneath a roof fenestration assembly that complies with all of the following:

1. The toplit daylight one shall extend laterally and longitudinally beyond the edge of the roof fenestration assembly to the nearest obstruction that is taller than 0.7 times the ceiling height, or up to 0.7 times the ceiling height, whichever is less, as indicated in C.
2. Direct sunlight is not blocked from hitting the roof fenestration assembly at the peak solar angle on the summer solstice by buildings or geological formations.
# 3.

The product of the visible transmittance of the roof fenestration assembly and the area of the rough opening of the roof fenestration assembly divided by the area of the to lit one is not less than 0.008.

Daylight zones at atrium spaces shall be established at the top floor surrounding the atrium and at the floor of the atrium space, and not on intermediate floors, as indicated in.
# Specific application controls shall be provided for the following:

1. The following lighting shall be controlled by an occupant sensor complying with
C or a time-switch control complying with C. In addition, a
manual control shall be provided to control such lighting separately from the general
lighting in the space:
1. Luminaires for which additional lighting power is claimed in accordance with
C.
2. Display and accent lighting, including lighting in display cases.
3. Lighting in display cases.
4. Supplemental task lighting, including permanently installed under-shelf or under-cabinet lighting.
5. Lighting equipment that is for sale or demonstration in lighting education.
2. Sleeping units shall have control devices or systems that are configured to automatically
switch off all installed luminaires and switched receptacles within 20 minutes after all
occupants have left the unit.
1. Lighting and switched receptacles controlled by card key controls in buildings
containing fewer than 50 sleeping units.
2. Spaces where patient care is directly provided.
3. Lighting for nonvisual applications, such as plant growth and food warming, shall be
controlled by a time switch control complying with C that is independent of
the controls for other lighting within the room or space.
4. Task lighting for medical and dental purposes that is in addition to general lighting
shall be provided with a manual control.

# Where required by this code, manual controls for lights shall comply with the following:

1. They shall be in a location with ready access to occupants.
2. They shall be located where the controlled lights are visible, or shall identify the area
served by the lights and indicate their status.

# Exterior lighting systems shall be provided with controls that comply with C through C.

1. Lighting for covered vehicle entrances and exits from buildings and parking structures
where required for eye adaptation.
# 2. Lighting controlled from within dwelling units.

Lights shall be automatically turned off when daylight is present and satisfies the lighting needs.

Building facade and landscape lighting shall automatically shut off from not later than 1 hour after building or business closing to not earlier than 1 hour before building or business opening.

Lighting that is not controlled in accordance with shall comply with the following:

1. It shall be controlled so that the total wattage of such lighting is automatically reduced by not less than 50 percent by selectively switching off or dimming luminaires at one of the following times:
2. 1. From not later than midnight to not earlier than 6 a.m.
2. From not later than one hour after building or business closing to not earlier than one hour before building or business opening.
3. During any time where activity has not been detected for 15 minutes or more.

Luminaires serving outdoor parking areas and having a rated input wattage of greater than 40 watts and a mounting height of 24 feet (7315 mm) or less above the ground shall be controlled so that the total wattage of such lighting is automatically reduced by not less than 50 percent during any time where activity has not been detected for 15 minutes or more. Not more than 1,500 watts of lighting power shall be controlled together.

Time-switch controls for exterior lighting shall comply with the following:

1. They shall have a clock capable of being programmed for not fewer than 7 days.
2. They shall be capable of being set for seven different day types per week.
3. They shall incorporate an automatic holiday setback feature.
4. They shall have program backup capabilities that prevent the loss of program and time settings for a period of not less than 10 hours in the event that power is interrupted.

Parking garage lighting shall be controlled by an occupant sensor complying with or a time switch control complying with. Additional lighting controls shall be provided as follows:
1. Lighting power of each luminaire shall be automatically reduced by not less than 30 percent when there is no activity detected within a lighting zone for 20 minutes. Lighting zones for this requirement shall be not larger than 3,600 square feet (334.5 m²). Lighting zones provided with less than 1.5 footcandles of illumination on the floor at the darkest point with all lights on are not required to have automatic light-reduction controls.
2. Where lighting for eye adaptation is provided at covered vehicle entrances and exits from buildings and parking structures, such lighting shall be separately controlled by a device that automatically reduces lighting power by at least 50 percent from sunset to sunrise.
3. The power to luminaires within 20 feet (606 mm) of perimeter wall openings shall automatically reduce in response to daylight by at least 50 percent.
1. Where the opening-to-wall ratio is less than 40 percent as viewed from the interior and encompassing the vertical distance from the driving surface to the lowest structural element.
2. Where the distance from the opening to any exterior daylight blocking obstruction is less than one-half the height from the bottom of the opening or fenestration to the top of the obstruction.
3. Where openings are obstructed by permanent screens or architectural elements restricting daylight entering the interior space.

Buildings shall have controls that are capable of automatically reducing general lighting power not less than 15 percent in response to a demand response signal.

1. Buildings with less than 4,000 watts of combined installed general lighting power in spaces that have more than 0.5 W/ft² (5.38 W/m²) of general lighting power.
2. Buildings where demand response programs are not available.
3. I-2 and I-3 occupancies.

A building complies with this section where its total connected interior lighting power calculated under C is not greater than the interior lighting power allowance calculated under C.

The total connected interior lighting power shall be determined in accordance with Evaluation 4-12.

where: C Total connected lighting power (watts). For luminaires with lamps connected directly to building power, such as line voltage.
lamps, the rated wattage of the lamp.

For luminaires incorporating a ballast or transformer, the rated input wattage of the ballast or transformer when operating that lamp.

For light-emitting diode luminaires with either integral or remote drivers, the rated wattage of the luminaire.

For lighting track, cable conductor, rail conductor, and plug-in busway systems that allow the addition and relocation of luminaires without rewiring, the wattage shall be one of the following:

1. The specified wattage of the luminaires, but not less than 8 W per linear foot (25 W/lin m).
2. The wattage limit of the permanent current-limiting devices protecting the system.
3. The wattage limit of the transformer supplying the system.

Other The wattage of all other luminaires and lighting sources not covered previously and associated with interior lighting verified by data supplied by the manufacturer or other approved sources.

The connected power associated with the following lighting equipment and applications is not included in calculating total connected lighting power:

1. Emergency lighting that is automatically off during normal operations.
2. Lighting in spaces specifically designed for use by occupants with special lighting needs, including those with visual impairment and other medical and age-related issues.
3. Casino gaming areas.
4. Mirror lighting in makeup or dressing areas used for video broadcasting, video or film recording, or live theatrical and music performance.
5. Task lighting for medical and dental purposes that is in addition to general lighting.
6. Display lighting for exhibits in galleries, museums and monuments that is in addition to general lighting.
7. Lighting in any location that is specifically used for video broadcasting, video or film recording, or live theatrical and music performance.
8. Lighting for photographic processes.
9. Lighting integral to equipment or instrumentation and installed by the manufacturer.
10. Task lighting for plant growth or maintenance.
11. Advertising signage or directional signage.
12. Lighting for food warming.
13. Lighting equipment that is for sale.
14. Lighting demonstration equipment in lighting education facilities.
15. Lighting approved because of safety considerations.
16. Lighting in retail display windows, provided that the display area is enclosed by ceiling-height partitions.
17. Furniture-mounted supplemental task lighting that is controlled by automatic shutoff.
18. Exit signs.
19. Antimicrobial lighting used for the sole purpose of disinfecting a space.
20. Lighting in sleeping units and dwelling units.

The total interior lighting power allowance (watts) for an entire building shall be determined according to T C using the Building Area Method or T C using the Space-by-Space Method. The interior lighting power allowance for projects that involve only portions of a building shall be
determined according to T C using the Space-by-Space method. Buildings with unfinished spaces shall use the Space-by-Space method.
# Current Page Data

| Facility Type               | T C  |
| --------------------------- | ---- |
| Automotive facility         | 0.73 |
| Convention center           | 0.64 |
| Courthouse                  | 0.75 |
| Dining: bar lounge/leisure  | 0.74 |
| Dining: cafeteria/fast food | 0.70 |
| Dining: family              | 0.65 |
| Dormitory                   | 0.52 |
| Exercise center             | 0.72 |
| Fire station                | 0.56 |
| Gymnasium                   | 0.75 |
| Health care clinic          | 0.77 |
| Hospitalᵃ                   | 0.2  |
| Hotel/otel                  | 0.53 |
| Library                     | 0.83 |
| Manufacturing facility      | 0.82 |
| Motion picture theater      | 0.43 |
| Multiple-family             | 0.46 |
| Museum                      | 0.56 |
| Office                      | 0.62 |
| Parking garage              | 0.17 |
| Penitentiary                | 0.65 |
| Performing arts theater     | 0.82 |
| Police station              | 0.62 |
| Post office                 | 0.64 |
| Religious building          | 0.66 |
| Retail                      | 0.78 |
| School/university           | 0.70 |
| Sports arena                | 0.73 |
| Town hall                   | 0.67 |
| Transportation              | 0.56 |
| Warehouse                   | 0.45 |
| Workshop                    | 0.86 |

For SI: 1 watt per square foot 10.76 watts per square meter.
# Current Page

# Occupancy Types

| Atrium                               | Less than 40 feet in height                                                    | 0.41 |
| ------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------ | ---- |
|                                      | Greater than 40 feet in height                                                 | 0.51 |
| Audience seating area                | In an auditorium                                                               | 0.57 |
|                                      | In a gymnasium                                                                 | 0.23 |
|                                      | In a motion picture theater                                                    | 0.27 |
|                                      | In a penitentiary                                                              | 0.56 |
|                                      | In a performing arts theater                                                   | 1.0  |
|                                      | In a religious building                                                        | 0.72 |
|                                      | In a sports arena                                                              | 0.27 |
|                                      | Otherwise                                                                      | 0.33 |
| Banking activity area                |                                                                                | 0.56 |
| Breakroom (See Lounge/breakroom)     |                                                                                |      |
| Classroom/lecture hall/training room | In a penitentiary                                                              | 0.74 |
|                                      | Otherwise                                                                      | 0.72 |
| Computer room, data center           |                                                                                | 0.75 |
| Conference/meeting/multipurpose room |                                                                                | 0.88 |
| Copy/print room                      |                                                                                | 0.56 |
| Corridor                             | In a facility for the visually impaired (and not used primarily by the staff)ᵇ | 0.71 |
|                                      | In a hospital                                                                  | 0.61 |
|                                      | Otherwise                                                                      | 0.44 |
| Courtroom                            |                                                                                | 1.08 |
| Dining area                          | In bar/lounge or leisure dining                                                | 0.76 |
|                                      | In cafeteria or fast food dining                                               | 0.36 |
|                                      | In a facility for the visually impaired (and not used primarily by the staff)ᵇ | 1.22 |
|                                      | In family dining                                                               | 0.52 |

# In a penitentiary

| Otherwise                                                                      | 0.42 |
| ------------------------------------------------------------------------------ | ---- |
| Electrical/mechanical room                                                     | 0.71 |
| Emergency vehicle garage                                                       | 0.51 |
| Food preparation area                                                          | 1.1  |
| Laboratory                                                                     |      |
| In or as a classroom                                                           | 1.05 |
| Otherwise                                                                      | 1.21 |
| Laundry/washing area                                                           | 0.51 |
| Loading dock, interior                                                         | 0.88 |
| Lobby                                                                          |      |
| For an elevator                                                                | 0.64 |
| In a facility for the visually impaired (and not used primarily by the staff)ᵇ | 1.44 |
| In a hotel                                                                     | 0.48 |
| In a motion picture theater                                                    | 0.20 |
| In a performing arts theater                                                   | 1.21 |
| Otherwise                                                                      | 0.80 |
| Locker room                                                                    | 0.43 |
| Lounge/breakroom                                                               |      |
| In a healthcare facility                                                       | 0.77 |
| other s Wellness Room                                                          | 0.68 |
| Otherwise                                                                      | 0.55 |
| Office                                                                         |      |
| Enclosed                                                                       | 0.73 |
| Open plan                                                                      | 0.56 |
| Parking area daylight transition one                                           | 1.06 |
| Parking area, interior                                                         | 0.11 |
| Pharmacy area                                                                  | 1.5  |
| Restroom                                                                       |      |
| In a facility for the visually impaired (and not used primarily by the staff)ᵇ | 0.6  |
| Otherwise                                                                      | 0.74 |
| Sales area                                                                     | 0.85 |
| Seating area, general                                                          | 0.21 |
| Security screening general areas                                               | 0.64 |

# Security screening in transportation facilities

| Security screening transportation waiting area             | 0.56 |
| ---------------------------------------------------------- | ---- |
| Stairwell                                                  | 0.47 |
| Storage room                                               | 0.35 |
| Vehicular maintenance area                                 | 0.5  |
| Workshop                                                   | 1.17 |
| Automotive (see Vehicular maintenance area)                |      |
| Convention Center exhibit space                            | 0.50 |
| Facility for the visually impairedᵇ                        |      |
| In a chapel (and not used primarily by the staff)          | 0.58 |
| In a recreation room (and not used primarily by the staff) | 1.20 |
| Gaming establishments                                      |      |
| High limits game                                           | 1.68 |
| Slots                                                      | 0.54 |
| Sportsbook                                                 | 0.82 |
| Table games                                                | 1.0  |
| Gymnasium/fitness center                                   |      |
| In an exercise area                                        | 0.82 |
| In a playing area                                          | 0.82 |
| Healthcare facility                                        |      |
| In an exam/treatment room                                  | 1.33 |
| In an imaging room                                         | 0.4  |
| In a medical supply room                                   | 0.56 |
| In a nursery                                               | 0.87 |
| In a nurse's station                                       | 1.07 |
| In an operating room                                       | 2.26 |
| In a physical therapy room                                 | 0.82 |
| In a recovery room                                         | 1.18 |
| In a telemedicine room                                     | 1.44 |
| Library                                                    |      |
| In a reading area                                          | 0.86 |

# In the stacks

| Manufacturing facility                                                   | 1.18 |
| ------------------------------------------------------------------------ | ---- |
| In a detailed manufacturing area                                         | 0.75 |
| In an equipment room                                                     | 0.73 |
| In an extra-high-bay area (greater than 50 feet floor-to-ceiling height) | 1.36 |
| In a high-bay area (25-50 feet floor-to-ceiling height)                  | 1.24 |
| In a low-bay area (less than 25 feet floor-to-ceiling height)            | 0.86 |

# Museum

| In a general exhibition area | 0.31 |
| ---------------------------- | ---- |
| In a restoration room        | 1.24 |

# Performing arts theater dressing room

| Dressing room | 0.30 |
| ------------- | ---- |

# Post office sorting area

| Post office sorting area | 0.71 |
| ------------------------ | ---- |

# Religious buildings

| In a fellowship hall           | 0.50 |
| ------------------------------ | ---- |
| In a worship/pulpit/choir area | 0.75 |

# Retail facilities

| In a dressing/fitting room | 0.45 |
| -------------------------- | ---- |
| Hair salon                 | 0.65 |
| Nail salon                 | 0.75 |
| In a mall concourse        | 0.57 |
| Massage space              | 0.81 |

# Sports arena playing area

| For a Class I facilityᶜ   | 2.86 |
| ------------------------- | ---- |
| For a Class II facilityᵈ  | 1.80 |
| For a Class III facilityᵉ | 1.20 |
| For a Class IV facilityᶠ  | 0.86 |

# Sports arena-Pools

| For a Class I facility   | 2.20 |
| ------------------------ | ---- |
| For a Class II facility  | 1.47 |
| For a Class III facility | 0.00 |
| For a Class IV facility  | 0.50 |

# Transportation facility

| Airport hanger               | 1.36 |
| ---------------------------- | ---- |
| At a terminal ticket counter | 0.40 |
| In a baggage/carousel area   | 0.28 |

# Passenger loading area

0.71

# In an airport concourse

0.4

# Warehouse storage area

For medium to bulky, palleti ed items 0.33

For smaller, hand-carried items 0.6

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 watt per square foot = 10.76 watts per square meter.

1. In cases where both a common space type and a building area specific space type are listed, the building area specific space type shall apply.
2. A Facility for the Visually Impaired is a facility that is licensed or will be licensed by local or state authorities for senior long-term care, adult daycare, senior support or people with special visual needs.
3. Class I facilities consist of professional facilities and semiprofessional, collegiate, or club facilities with seating for 5,000 or more spectators.
4. Class II facilities consist of collegiate and semiprofessional facilities with seating for fewer than 5,000 spectators, club facilities with seating for between 2,000 and 5,000 spectators, and amateur league and high school facilities with seating for more than 2,000 spectators.
5. Class III facilities consist of club, amateur league and high school facilities with seating for 2,000 or fewer spectators.
6. Class IV facilities consist of elementary school and recreational facilities and amateur league and high school facilities without provision for spectators.

# C

For the building Area method, the interior lighting power allowance is calculated as follows:

1. For each building area type inside the building, determine the applicable building area type and the allowed lighting power density for that type from TC. For building area types not listed, select the building area type that most closely represents the use of that area. For the purposes of this method, an “area” shall be defined as all contiguous spaces that accommodate or are associated with a single building area type.
2. Determine the floor area for each building area type listed in TC and multiply this area by the applicable value from TC to determine the allowed lighting power (watts) for each building area type. Sleeping units and dwelling units are excluded from lighting power allowance calculations by application of Section C405.1.1. The area of sleeping units and dwelling units is not included in the calculation.
3. The total interior lighting power allowance (watts) for the entire building is the sum of the lighting power from each building area type.

# C

Where a building has unfinished spaces, the lighting power allowance for the unfinished spaces shall be the total connected lighting power for those spaces, or 0.1 watts per square foot (1.08 w/m²), whichever is less.
the Space-by-Space method, the interior lighting power allowance is calculated as follows:

1. For each space enclosed by partitions that are not less than 80 percent of the ceiling height, determine the applicable space type from T C. For space types not listed, select the space type that most closely represents the proposed use of the space. Where a space has multiple functions, that space may be divided into separate spaces.
2. Determine the total floor area of all the spaces of each space type and multiply by the value for the space type in T C to determine the allowed lighting power (watts) for each space type. Sleeping units and dwelling units are excluded from lighting power allowance calculations by application of Section C405.1.1. The area of sleeping units and dwelling units is not included in the calculation.
3. The total interior lighting power allowance (watts) shall be the sum of the lighting power allowances for all space types.

C C Where using the Space-by-Space method, an increase in the interior lighting power allowance is permitted for specific lighting functions. Additional power shall be permitted only where the specified lighting is installed and controlled in accordance with C. This additional power shall be used only for the specified luminaires and shall not be used for any other purpose. An increase in the interior lighting power allowance is permitted in the following cases:

1. For lighting equipment to be installed in sales areas specifically to highlight merchandise, the additional lighting power shall be determined in accordance with Evaluation 4-13.

where:

- Retail Area 1: The floor area for all products not listed in Retail Area 2, 3 or 4.
- Retail Area 2: The floor area used for the sale of vehicles, sporting goods and
# Retail Area 3

The floor area used for the sale of furniture, clothing, cosmetics and artwork.

# Retail Area 4

The floor area used for the sale of jewelry, crystal and china. Other merchandise categories are permitted to be included in Retail Areas 2 through 4, provided that justification documenting the need for additional lighting power based on visual inspection, contrast or other critical display is approved by the code official.

# 2.

For spaces in which lighting is specified to be installed in addition to the general lighting for the purpose of decorative appearance or for highlighting art or exhibits, provided that the additional lighting power shall be not more than 0.66 W/ft² (7.1 W/m²) in lobbies and not more than 0.55 W/ft² (5. W/m²) in other spaces.

# C

# H

Permanently installed luminaires shall have a photosynthetic photon efficacy of not less than 1.7 mol/ for horticultural lighting in greenhouses and not less than 1. mol/ for all other horticultural lighting. Luminaires for horticultural lighting in greenhouses shall be controlled by a device that automatically turns off the luminaire when sufficient daylight is available. Luminaires for horticultural lighting shall be controlled by a device that automatically turns off the luminaire at specific programmed times.

# C

# C

The total connected exterior lighting power calculated in accordance with C shall be not greater than the exterior lighting power allowance calculated in accordance with C.

# C

# T

The total exterior connected lighting power shall be the total maximum rated wattage of all lighting that is powered through the energy service for the building.

Lighting used for the following applications shall not be included:

1. Lighting approved because of safety considerations.
2. Emergency lighting that is automatically off during normal operations.
3. Exit signs.
4. Specialized signal, directional and marker lighting associated with transportation.
5. Advertising signage or directional signage.
6. Integral to equipment or instrumentation and installed by its manufacturer.
7. Lighting in any location that is specifically used for video broadcasting, video or film recording, or live theatrical and music performance.
8. Athletic playing areas.
9. Temporary lighting.
10. Industrial production, material handling, transportation sites and associated storage areas.
11. Theme elements in theme/amusement parks.
12. Used to highlight features of art, public monuments and the national flag.

13. Lighting for water features and swimming pools.

14. Lighting controlled from within sleeping units and dwelling units.

15. Lighting of the exterior means of egress as required by the International Building Code.

# The exterior lighting power allowance (watts) is calculated as follows:

1. Determine the Lighting Zone (LZ) for the building according to T C, unless otherwise specified by the code official.
2. For each exterior area that is to be illuminated by lighting that is powered through the energy service for the building, determine the applicable area type from T C. For area types not listed, select the area type that most closely represents the proposed use of the area.
3. Determine the total area or length of each area type and multiply by the value for the area type in T C to determine the lighting power (watts) allowed for each area type.
4. The total exterior lighting power allowance (watts) is the sum of the base site allowance determined according to T C, plus the watts from each area type.
# Lighting

# 1

Developed areas of national parks, state parks, forest land, and rural areas

# 2

Areas predominantly consisting of residential zoning, neighborhood business districts, light industrial with limited nighttime use and residential mixed-use areas

# 3

All other areas not classified as lighting zone 1, 2 or 4

# 4

High-activity commercial districts in major metropolitan areas as designated by the local land use planning authority
# IGHTI G PO R O C OR I I G T RIOR

| ase Site Allowance                        | W                            |                              |                             |                              |
| ----------------------------------------- | ---------------------------- | ---------------------------- | --------------------------- | ---------------------------- |
|                                           | 160                          | 280                          | 400                         | 560                          |
| Parking areas and drives                  | 0.015 W/ft²                  | 0.026 W/ft²                  | 0.037 W/ft²                 | 0.052 W/ft²                  |
| Walkways and ramps less                   | 0.50 W/linear foot           | 0.50 W/linear foot           | 0.55 W/linear foot          | 0.60 W/linear foot           |
| Pla a areas                               | 0.028 W/ft²                  | 0.04 W/ft²                   | 0.070 W/ft²                 | 0.0 8 W/ft²                  |
| Dining areas                              | 0.156 W/ft²                  | 0.273 W/ft²                  | 0.3 0 W/ft²                 | 0.546 W/ft²                  |
| Stairways                                 | Exempt                       |                              |                             |                              |
| Pedestrian tunnels                        | 0.063 W/ft²                  | 0.110 W/ft²                  | 0.157 W/ft²                 | 0.220 W/ft²                  |
| Landscaping                               | 0.014 W/ft²                  | 0.025 W/ft²                  | 0.036 W/ft²                 | 0.050 W/ft²                  |
| Pedestrian and vehicular entrances        | 5.6 W/linear foot of opening | 0.8 W/linear foot of opening | 14 W/linear foot of opening | 1.6 W/linear foot of opening |
| Entry canopies                            | 0.072 W/ft²                  | 0.126 W/ft²                  | 0.180 W/ft²                 | 0.252 W/ft²                  |
| Loading docks                             | 0.104 W/ft²                  | 0.182 W/ft²                  | 0.260 W/ft²                 | 0.364 W/ft²                  |
| Free-standing and attached                | 0.20 W/ft²                   | 0.35 W/ft²                   | 0.50 W/ft²                  | 0.70 W/ft²                   |
| Open areas (including vehicle sales lots) | 0.072 W/ft²                  | 0.126 W/ft²                  | 0.180 W/ft²                 | 0.252 W/ft²                  |
| Street frontage for vehicle sales lots    | No allowance                 | 7.2 W/linear foot            | 10.3 W/linear foot          | 14.4 W/linear foot           |

1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 watt per square foot = 10.76 watts per square meter. W = watts.
# LIGHTING POWER ALLOWANCES

|                                                                                                   |                                                            |                             |                             | 0.075 W/ft² of          | 0.113 W/ft² of | 0.15 W/ft² of |
| ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------- | --------------------------- | --------------------------- | ----------------------- | -------------- | ------------- |
| Building facades                                                                                  | No allowance                                               | gross above-grade wall area | gross above-grade wall area |                         |                |               |
| Automated teller machines (ATM) and night depositories                                            | 0 W per location plus 35 W per additional ATM per location |                             |                             |                         |                |               |
| Uncovered entrances and gatehouse inspection stations at guarded facilities                       | 0.144 W/ft² of area                                        | 0.252 W/ft² of area         | 0.360 W/ft² of area         | 0.504 W/ft² of area     |                |               |
| Uncovered loading areas for law enforcement, fire, ambulance and other emergency service vehicles | 0.104 W/ft² of area                                        | 0.182 W/ft² of area         | 0.260 W/ft² of area         | 0.364 W/ft² of area     |                |               |
| Drive-up windows and doors                                                                        | 53 W per drive through                                     | 2 W per drive through       | 132 W per drive through     | 185 W per drive through |                |               |
| Parking near 24-hour retail entrances                                                             | 80 W per main entry                                        | 140 W per main entry        | 200 W per main entry        | 280 W per main entry    |                |               |

For SI: 1 watt per square foot = 10.76 watts per square meter.

Additional exterior lighting power allowances are available for the specific lighting applications listed in this section. These additional power allowances shall be used only for the luminaires serving these specific applications and shall not be used to increase any other lighting power allowance.

Gas-fired lighting appliances shall not be equipped with continuously burning pilot ignition systems.

Each dwelling unit located in a Group R-2 building shall have a separate electrical meter.
Low-voltage dry-type distribution electric transformers shall meet the minimum efficiency requirements of T C as tested and rated in accordance with the test procedure listed in O C R. The efficiency shall be verified through certification under an approved certification program or, where a certification program does not exist, the equipment efficiency ratings shall be supported by data furnished by the transformer manufacturer.

# Exempt Transformers

The following transformers are exempt in accordance with the DOE definition of Distribution Transformers found in 10 CFR 431.1 2:

1. Transformers with tap range 20 percent or more.
2. Drive (isolation) transformers.
3. Rectifier transformers.
4. Auto-transformers.
5. Uninterruptible power supply transformers.
6. Special impedance transformers.
7. Regulating transformers.
8. Sealed transformers.
9. Machine tool (control) transformers.
10. Welding transformers.
11. Grounding transformers.
12. Testing transformers.
13. Nonventilated transformers.
# Current Page

# T C

| kVA Rating | Efficiency | kVA Rating | Efficiency |
| ---------- | ---------- | ---------- | ---------- |
| 15         | 7.70       | 15         | 7.8        |
| 25         | 8.00       | 30         | 8.23       |
| 37.5       | 8.20       | 45         | 8.40       |
| 50         | 8.30       | 75         | 8.60       |
| 75         | 8.50       | 112.5      | 8.74       |
| 100        | 8.60       | 150        | 8.83       |
| 167        | 8.70       | 225        | 8.4        |
| 250        | 8.80       | 300        | .02        |
| 333        | 8.0        | 500        | .14        |
| 750        | .23        | 1000       | .28        |

a. A low-voltage dry-type distribution transformer with a kVA rating not listed in the table shall have its minimum efficiency level determined by linear interpolation of the kVA and efficiency values listed in the table immediately above and below its kVA rating. Extrapolation shall not be used below the minimum values or above the maximum values shown for single-phase transformers and three-phase transformers.

b. kiloVolt-Amp rating.

c. Nominal efficiencies shall be established in accordance with the O C R test procedure for low-voltage dry-type transformers.

# C

Electric motors shall meet the minimum efficiency requirements of T C through C when tested and rated in accordance with the O C R. The efficiency shall be verified through certification under an approved certification program or, where a certification program does not exist, the equipment efficiency ratings shall be supported by data furnished by the motor manufacturer.

The standards in this section shall not apply to the following exempt electric motors:

1. Air-over electric motors.
2. Component sets of an electric motor.
3. Liquid-cooled electric motors.
4. Submersible electric motors.
5. Inverter-only electric motors.
# Electric Motor Efficiency Table

| Horsepower (HP) | Efficiency (%) |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |
| --------------- | -------------- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |
| 1               | 1.5            | 2    | 3    | 5    |      | 7.5  | 10   | 15   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |
| 1 (0.75)        | 77.0           | 77.0 | 85.5 | 85.5 | 82.5 | 82.5 | 75.5 | 75.5 |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |
| 1.5 (1.1)       | 84.0           | 84.0 | 86.5 | 86.5 | 87.5 | 86.5 | 78.5 | 77.0 |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |
| 2 (1.5)         | 85.5           | 85.5 | 86.5 | 86.5 | 88.5 | 87.5 | 84.0 | 86.5 |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |
| 3 (2.2)         | 86.5           | 85.5 | 8 .5 | 8 .5 | 8 .5 | 88.5 | 85.5 | 87.5 |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |
| 5 (3.7)         | 88.5           | 86.5 | 8 .5 | 8 .5 | 8 .5 | 8 .5 | 86.5 | 88.5 |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |
| 7.5 (5.5)       | 8 .5           | 88.5 | 1.7  | 1.0  | 1.0  | 0.2  | 86.5 | 8 .5 |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |
| 10 (7.5)        | 0.2            | 8 .5 | 1.7  | 1.7  | 1.0  | 1.7  | 8 .5 | 0.2  |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |
| 15 (11)         | 1.0            | 0.2  | 2.4  | 3.0  | 1.7  | 1.7  | 8 .5 | 0.2  |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |
| 20 (15)         | 1.0            | 1.0  | 3.0  | 3.0  | 1.7  | 2.4  | 0.2  | 1.0  |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |
| 25 (18.5)       | 1.7            | 1.7  | 3.6  | 3.6  | 3.0  | 3.0  | 0.2  | 1.0  |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |
| 30 (22)         | 1.7            | 1.7  | 3.6  | 4.1  | 3.0  | 3.6  | 1.7  | 1.7  |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |
| 40 (30)         | 2.4            | 2.4  | 4.1  | 4.1  | 4.1  | 4.1  | 1.7  | 1.7  |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |
| 50 (37)         | 3.0            | 3.0  | 4.5  | 4.5  | 4.1  | 4.1  | 2.4  | 2.4  |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |
| 60 (45)         | 3.6            | 3.6  | 5.0  | 5.0  | 4.5  | 4.5  | 2.4  | 3.0  |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |
| 75 (55)         | 3.6            | 3.6  | 5.4  | 5.0  | 4.5  | 4.5  | 3.6  | 4.1  |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |
| 100 (75)        | 4.1            | 3.6  | 5.4  | 5.4  | 5.0  | 5.0  | 3.6  | 4.1  |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |
| 125 (0)         | 5.0            | 4.1  | 5.4  | 5.4  | 5.0  | 5.0  | 4.1  | 4.1  |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |
| 150 (110)       | 5.0            | 4.1  | 5.8  | 5.8  | 5.8  | 5.4  | 4.1  | 4.1  |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |
| 200 (150)       | 5.4            | 5.0  | 6.2  | 5.8  | 5.8  | 5.4  | 4.5  | 4.1  |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |
| 250 (186)       | 5.8            | 5.0  | 6.2  | 5.8  | 5.8  | 5.8  | 5.0  | 5.0  |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |
| 300 (224)       | 5.8            | 5.4  | 6.2  | 5.8  | 5.8  | 5.8  |      |      |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |
| 350 (261)       | 5.8            | 5.4  | 6.2  | 5.8  | 5.8  | 5.8  |      |      |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |
| 400 (2 8)       | 5.8            | 5.8  | 6.2  | 5.8  |      |      |      |      |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |
| 450 (336)       | 5.8            | 6.2  | 6.2  | 6.2  |      |      |      |      |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |
| 500 (373)       | 5.8            | 6.2  | 6.2  | 6.2  |      |      |      |      |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |

a. Nominal efficiencies shall be established in accordance with O C R.

b. For purposes of determining the required minimum nominal full-load efficiency of an electric motor that has a horsepower or kilowatt rating between two horsepower or two kilowatt ratings listed in this table, each such motor shall be deemed to have a listed horsepower or kilowatt.
# Rating Determination

Rating, determined as follows:

1. A horsepower at or above the midpoint between the two consecutive horsepowers shall be rounded up to the higher of the two horsepowers.
2. A horsepower below the midpoint between the two consecutive horsepowers shall be rounded down to the lower of the two horsepowers.
3. A kilowatt rating shall be directly converted from kilowatts to horsepower using the formula: 1 kilowatt (1/0.746) horsepower. The conversion should be calculated to three significant decimal places, and the resulting horsepower shall be rounded in accordance with No. 1 or No. 2 above, as applicable.
# OTOR HOR  PO  R   T    R

| T         | C         |         |         |         |           |     |   |   |   |   |   |
| --------- | --------- | ------- | ------- | ------- | --------- | --- | - | - | - | - | - |
| 1 (0.75)  | 1.5 (1.1) | 2 (1.5) | 3 (2.2) | 5 (3.7) | 7.5 (5.5) |     |   |   |   |   |   |
| 10 (7.5)  | 1.7       | 1.7     | 1.0     | 1.7     | 8.5       | 0.2 |   |   |   |   |   |
| 15 (11)   | 2.4       | 3.0     | 1.7     | 1.7     | 8.5       | 0.2 |   |   |   |   |   |
| 20 (15)   | 3.0       | 3.0     | 1.7     | 2.4     | 0.2       | 1.0 |   |   |   |   |   |
| 25 (18.5) | 3.6       | 3.6     | 3.0     | 3.0     | 0.2       | 1.0 |   |   |   |   |   |
| 30 (22)   | 3.6       | 4.1     | 3.0     | 3.6     | 1.7       | 1.7 |   |   |   |   |   |
| 40 (30)   | 4.1       | 4.1     | 4.1     | 4.1     | 1.7       | 1.7 |   |   |   |   |   |
| 50 (37)   | 4.5       | 4.5     | 4.1     | 4.1     | 2.4       | 2.4 |   |   |   |   |   |
| 60 (45)   | 5.0       | 5.0     | 4.5     | 4.5     | 2.4       | 3.0 |   |   |   |   |   |
| 75 (55)   | 5.4       | 5.0     | 4.5     | 4.5     | 3.6       | 4.1 |   |   |   |   |   |
| 100 (75)  | 5.4       | 5.4     | 5.0     | 5.0     | 3.6       | 4.1 |   |   |   |   |   |
| 125 (0)   | 5.4       | 5.4     | 5.0     | 5.0     | 4.1       | 4.1 |   |   |   |   |   |
| 150 (110) | 5.8       | 5.8     | 5.8     | 5.4     | 4.1       | 4.1 |   |   |   |   |   |
| 200 (150) | 6.2       | 5.8     | 5.8     | 5.4     | 4.5       | 4.1 |   |   |   |   |   |

a. Nominal efficiencies shall be established in accordance with O C R.

b. For purposes of determining the required minimum nominal full-load efficiency of an electric motor that has a horsepower or kilowatt rating between two horsepower or two kilowatt ratings listed in this table, each such motor shall be deemed to have a listed horsepower or kilowatt rating, determined as follows:

1. A horsepower at or above the midpoint between the two consecutive horsepowers shall be rounded up to the higher of the two horsepowers.
2. A horsepower below the midpoint between the two consecutive horsepowers shall be rounded down to the lower of the two horsepowers.
3. A kilowatt rating shall be directly converted from kilowatts to horsepower using the formula: 1 kilowatt (1/0.746) horsepower. The conversion should be calculated to three significant decimal places, and the resulting horsepower shall be rounded in accordance with No. 1 or No. 2 above, as applicable.
# Current Page

| T C  | OTOR |      |      |
| ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- |
| HOR  | PO R | RP   |      |
| 0.25 | 65.6 | 6.5  | 67.5 |
| 0.33 | 6.5  | 73.4 | 71.4 |
| 0.50 | 73.4 | 78.2 | 75.3 |
| 0.75 | 76.8 | 81.1 | 81.7 |
| 1    | 77.0 | 83.5 | 82.5 |
| 1.5  | 84.0 | 86.5 | 83.8 |
| 2    | 85.5 | 86.5 | N/A  |
| 3    | 85.5 | 86.  | N/A  |

N/A Not Applicable.

a. Average full-load efficiencies shall be established in accordance with O C R.
# Current Page

# Motor Efficiency Table

|      | T | C    |      |      |
| ---- | - | ---- | ---- | ---- |
| 0.25 |   | 66.6 | 68.5 | 62.2 |
| 0.33 |   | 70.5 | 72.4 | 66.6 |
| 0.50 |   | 72.4 | 76.2 | 76.2 |
| 0.75 |   | 76.2 | 81.8 | 80.2 |
| 1    |   | 80.4 | 82.6 | 81.1 |
| 1.5  |   | 81.5 | 83.8 | N/A  |
| 2    |   | 82.  | 84.5 | N/A  |
| 3    |   | 84.1 | N/A  | N/A  |

N/A - Not Applicable.

a. Average full-load efficiencies shall be established in accordance with O C R.

Transformers, uninterruptable power supplies, motors and electrical power processing equipment in data center systems shall comply with Section 8 of ASHRAE 0.4 in addition to this code.

Vertical and horizontal transportation systems and equipment shall comply with this section.

For the luminaires in each elevator cab, not including signals and displays, the sum of the lumens divided by the sum of the watts shall be not less than 35 lumens per watt. Ventilation fans in elevators that do not have their own air-conditioning system shall not consume more than 0.33 watts/cfm at the maximum rated speed of the fan. Controls shall be provided that will de-energize ventilation fans and lighting systems when the elevator is stopped, unoccupied and with its doors closed for over 15 minutes.

Escalators and moving walks shall comply with C and shall have automatic controls that reduce speed as permitted in accordance with C and applicable local code.
A variable voltage drive system that reduces operating voltage in response to light loading conditions is an alternative to the reduced speed function.

Escalators shall be designed to recover electrical energy when resisting overspeed in the down direction.

The total voltage drop across the combination of customer-owned service conductors, feeder conductors and branch circuit conductors shall not exceed 5 percent.

The following shall have automatic receptacle control complying with:

1. At least 50 percent of all 125V, 15- and 20-amp receptacles installed in enclosed offices, conference rooms, rooms used primarily for copy or print functions, breakrooms, classrooms and individual workstations, including those installed in modular partitions and module office workstation systems.
2. At least 25 percent of branch circuit feeders installed for modular furniture not shown on the construction documents.

Automatic receptacle controls shall comply with the following:

1. Either split controlled receptacles shall be provided with the top receptacle controlled, or a controlled receptacle shall be located within 12 inches (304.8 mm) of each uncontrolled receptacle.
2. One of the following methods shall be used to provide control:
1. A scheduled basis using a time-of-day operated control device that turns receptacle power off at specific programmed times and can be programmed separately for each day of the week. The control device shall be configured to provide an independent schedule for each portion of the building of not more than 5,000 square feet (464.5 m²) and not more than one floor. The occupant shall be able to manually override an area for not more than 2 hours. Any individual override switch shall control the receptacles of not more than 5,000 feet (1524 m).
2. An occupant sensor control that shall turn off receptacles within 20 minutes of all occupants leaving a space.
3. An automated signal from another control or alarm system that shall turn off receptacles within 20 minutes after determining that the area is unoccupied.
3. All controlled receptacles shall be permanently marked in accordance with and be uniformly distributed throughout the space.
4. Plug-in devices shall not comply.

Automatic receptacle controls are not required for the following:

1. Receptacles specifically designated for equipment requiring continuous operation (24 hours).
hours per day, 365 days per year).

1. Spaces where an automatic control would endanger the safety or security of the room or building occupants.
2. Within a single modular office workstation, noncontrolled receptacles are permitted to be located more than 12 inches (304.8 mm), but not more than 72 inches (1828 mm) from the controlled receptacles serving that workstation.

Buildings shall be equipped to measure, monitor, record and report energy consumption data in compliance with C through C. A plan for quantifying annual energy type and use disclosure in compliance with Sections C405.13.1 through C405.13.8 shall be submitted with the construction documents.

1. Buildings less than 10,000 square feet (929 m²).
2. Existing buildings
3. R-2 occupancies with less than 10,000 square feet (929 m²) of gross floor area.
4. Individual tenant spaces less than 5,000 square feet (464.5 m²) with their own utility service and meter.

For all electrical energy supplied to the building and its associated site, including but not limited to site lighting, parking, recreational facilities and other areas that serve the building and its occupants, meters or other measurement devices shall be provided to collect energy consumption data for each end-use category required by C.

Meters or other approved measurement devices shall be provided to collect energy use data for each end-use category indicated in T C. Where multiple meters are used to measure any end-use category, the data acquisition system shall total all of the energy used by that category. Not more than 5 percent of the measured load for each of the end-use categories indicated in T C shall be permitted to be from a load that is not within that category.

1. HVAC and water heating equipment serving only an individual dwelling unit shall not require end-use metering.
2. End-use metering shall not be required for fire pumps, stairwell pressurization fans or any system that operates only during testing or emergency.
3. End-use metering shall not be required for an individual tenant space having a floor area not greater than 2,500 square feet (232 m²) where a dedicated source meter complying with C is provided.
# DESCRIPTION OF ENERGY USE

| **Category**                                      | **Description**                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
| ------------------------------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Total HVAC system                                 | Heating, cooling and ventilation, including but not limited to fans, pumps, boilers, chillers and water heating. Energy used by 120-volt equipment, or by 208/120-volt equipment that is located in a building where the main service is 480/277-volt power, is permitted to be excluded from total HVAC system energy use. |
| Interior lighting                                 | Lighting systems located within the building.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
| Exterior lighting                                 | Lighting systems located on the building site but not within the building.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| Plug loads                                        | Devices, appliances and equipment connected to convenience receptacle outlets.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| Process load                                      | Any single load that is not included in an HVAC, lighting or plug load category and that exceeds 5 percent of the peak connected load of the whole building, including but not limited to data centers, manufacturing equipment and commercial kitchens.                                                                    |
| Electric vehicle charging                         | Electric vehicle charging loads.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| Building operations and other miscellaneous loads | The remaining loads not included elsewhere in this table, including but not limited to vertical transportation systems, automatic doors, motorized shading systems, ornamental fountains, ornamental fireplaces, swimming pools, in-ground spas and snow-melt systems.                                                      |
| Electric water heating                            | Electricity used to generate hot water. Electric water heating with design capacity that is less than 10 percent of building service rating.                                                                                                                                                                                |

Meters or other measurement devices required by this section shall be configured to automatically communicate energy consumption data to the data acquisition system required by C. Source meters shall be allowed to be any digital-type meter. Lighting, HVAC or other building systems that can self-monitor their energy consumption shall be permitted instead of meters. Current sensors shall be permitted, provided that they have a tested accuracy of 2 percent. Required metering systems and equipment shall have the capability to provide at least hourly data that is fully integrated into the data acquisition system and graphical energy report in accordance with C and C. Non-intrusive load monitoring (NILM) packages that extract energy consumption data from detailed electric waveform analysis can be substituted for individual meters if the equivalent data can be made available for collection in Section C405.13.4 and reporting in Section C405.13.5.
A data acquisition system shall have the capability to store the data from the required meters and other sensing devices for a minimum of 36 months. The data acquisition system shall have the capability to store real-time energy consumption data and provide hourly, daily, monthly and yearly logged data for each end-use category required by Section C. The data acquisition system shall have the capability of providing building total peak electric demand and the time(s) of day and time(s) of year at which the peak occurs. Peak demand shall be integrated over the same time period as the underlying meter reading rate, which is typically 15 minutes but shall be no longer than one hour.

A permanent and readily accessible reporting mechanism shall be provided in the building that is accessible by building operation and management personnel. The reporting mechanism shall have the capability to graphically provide the electrical energy consumption for each end-use category required by C at least every hour, day, month and year for the previous 36 months. The graphical report shall also incorporate natural gas interval data or the ability to enter gas utility bills into the report.

Consumption of non-electrical energy such as gas, district heating or cooling, unregulated fuel sources, or other non-renewable energy shall be automatically metered or a method developed for usage calculation annually or more frequently from energy bills. Natural gas usage shall be monitored through on site interval metering or from utility interval data.

The ability to measure the production of on-site renewable energy shall be provided with the same or greater frequency as metered systems.

# The plan for annual energy use data gathering and disclosure shall include the following:

1. Property information including building type, total gross floor area, year built or year planned for construction completion, and occupancy type.
2. Total annual building site energy use per unit area (square foot) of gross floor area as collected or documented through Section C405.13.5 (electrical) and Section C405.13.6 (non-electrical) sources, separated by energy type (electric, gas, district cooling or heating, unregulated fuel sources etc.). Electrical energy shall be further broken down by load type as identified in Table C405.13.2.
3. Annual site generated renewable energy per unit area (square foot) of gross floor area.
4. Peak electric demand per unit area (square foot) of gross floor area, with an estimate of
# 5. For projects using the Section C407 Simulated Building Performance approach to show compliance, include the following information from the building simulation:

1. Modeling software used.
2. Assumptions made that impact the simulated annual energy use per unit (square foot or square meter) of gross floor area (e.g. occupancy schedules, daylighting assumptions, climate file, plug loads, envelope performance including use of shading systems).
3. Simulated annual energy use per unit (square foot or square meter) of gross floor area.
4. Peak load, the time of date and time of peak and the hourly load profile on the day that experiences peak load.

# C

# C P T I

New parking facilities shall be provided with electric vehicle power transfer infrastructure in compliance with Sections C405.14.1 through C405.14.6.

The number of required EV spaces, EV capable spaces and EV ready spaces shall be determined in accordance with this Section and Table C405.14.1 based on the total number of automobile parking spaces and shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number. For R-2 buildings, the Table requirements shall be based on the total number of dwelling units or the total number of automobile parking spaces, whichever is less.

1. Where more than one parking facility is provided on a building site, the number of required automobile parking spaces required to have EV power transfer infrastructure shall be calculated separately for each parking facility.
2. Where one shared parking facility serves multiple building occupancies, the required number of spaces shall be determined proportionally based on the floor area of each building occupancy.
3. Installed EVSE spaces that exceed the minimum requirements of this section may be used to meet minimum requirements for EV ready spaces and EV capable spaces.
4. Installed EV ready spaces that exceed the minimum requirements of this section may be used to meet minimum requirements for EV capable spaces.
5. Where the number of EV ready spaces allocated for R-2 occupancies is equal to the number of dwelling units or to the number of automobile parking spaces allocated to R-2 occupancies, whichever is less, requirements for EVSE spaces for R-2 occupancies shall not apply.
6. Requirements for a Group S-2 parking garage shall be determined by the occupancies served by that parking garage. Where new automobile spaces do not serve specific occupancies, the values for Group S-2 parking garage in Table C405.14.1 shall be used.

Parking facilities, serving occupancies other than R2 with fewer than 10 automobile parking spaces.
# Occupancy

| Group                                | EVSE Spaces | EV Ready Spaces | EV Capable Spaces |
| ------------------------------------ | ----------- | --------------- | ----------------- |
| Group A                              | 10          | 0               | 10                |
| Group                                | 15          | 0               | 30                |
| Group E                              | 2           | 0               | 5                 |
| Group F                              | 2           | 0               | 5                 |
| Group H                              | 1           | 0               | 0                 |
| Group I                              | 2           | 0               | 5                 |
| Group                                | 10          | 0               | 10                |
| Group R-1                            | 20          | 5               | 75                |
| Group R-2                            | 20          | 5               | 75                |
| Group R-3 and R-4                    | 2           | 0               | 5                 |
| Group S exclusive of parking garages | 1           | 0               | 0                 |
| Group S-2 parking garages            | 1           | 0               | 0                 |

# Requirements for EV Capable Spaces

Each EV capable space used to meet the requirements of Section C405.14.1 shall comply with all of the following:

1. A continuous raceway or cable assembly shall be installed between an enclosure or outlet located within 3 feet (14 mm) of the EV capable space and a suitable panelboard or other onsite electrical distribution equipment.
2. Installed raceway or cable assembly shall be sized and rated to supply a minimum circuit capacity in accordance with C405.14.5.
3. The electrical distribution equipment to which the raceway or cable assembly connects shall have sufficient dedicated space and spare electrical capacity for a 2-pole circuit breaker or set of fuses.
4. The electrical enclosure or outlet and the electrical distribution equipment directory shall be marked: For future electric vehicle supply equipment (EVSE).
5. Reserved capacity shall be no less than 4.1 kVA (20A 208/240V) for each EV capable space.

# Requirements for EV Ready Spaces

Each branch circuit serving EV ready spaces used to meet the requirements of Section C405.14.1 shall comply with all of the following:

1. Terminate at an outlet or enclosure, located within 3 feet (14 mm) of each EV ready space it serves.
2. Have a minimum circuit capacity in accordance with C405.14.5.
3. The panelboard or other electrical distribution equipment directory shall designate the branch circuit as For electric vehicle supply equipment (EVSE) and the outlet or enclosure shall be marked For electric vehicle supply equipment (EVSE).
An installed EVSE with multiple output connections shall be permitted to serve multiple EVSE spaces. Each EVSE installed to meet the requirements of Section C405.14.1, serving either a single EVSE space or multiple EVSE spaces, shall comply with all of the following:

1. Have a minimum circuit capacity in accordance with C405.14.5.
2. Have a minimum charging rate in accordance with C405.14.4.1.
3. Be located within 3 feet (14 mm) of each EVSE space it serves.
4. Be installed in accordance with Section C405.14.6.

Each installed EVSE shall comply with one of the following:

1. Be capable of charging at a minimum rate of 6.2 kVA (or 30A at 208/240V).
2. When serving multiple EVSE spaces and controlled by an energy management system providing load management, be capable of simultaneously sharing each EVSE space at a minimum rate of no less than 3.3 kVA.
3. When serving EVSE spaces allowed to have a minimum circuit capacity of 2.7 kVA in accordance with C405.14.5.1 and controlled by an energy management system providing load management, be capable of simultaneously charging each EVSE space at a minimum rate of no less than 2.1 kVA.

The capacity of electrical infrastructure serving each EV capable space, EV ready space, and EVSE space shall comply with one of the following:

1. A branch circuit shall have a rated capacity not less than 8.3 kVA (or 40A at 208/240V) for each EV ready space or EVSE space it serves.
2. The requirements of C405.14.5.1.

The capacity of each branch circuit serving multiple EVSE spaces, EV ready spaces or EV capable spaces designed to be controlled by an energy management system providing load management in accordance with NFPA 70, shall comply with one of the following:

1. Have a minimum capacity of 4.1 kVA per space.
2. Have a minimum capacity of 2.7 kVA per space when serving EV ready spaces or EVSE space for R-2 occupancies when all (100%) of the automobile parking spaces designated for R-2 occupancies are designed to be EV ready spaces or EVSE spaces.
# 3. Have a minimum capacity of 2.7 kVA per space when serving EV ready spaces or EVSE spaces for a building site when all (100) of the automobile parking spaces are designed to be EV ready or EVSE spaces.

EVSE shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 70 and shall be listed and labeled in accordance with UL 2202 or UL 254. EVSE shall be accessible in accordance with International Building Code Section 1107.

# C R

Buildings in Climate Zones 0-7 shall comply with C405.15.1 through C405.15.4.

# C O

Buildings shall install equipment for on-site renewable electricity generation with a direct current (DC) nameplate power rating of not less than 0.75 W/ft² (8.1 W/m²) multiplied by the sum of the gross conditioned floor area of all floors not to exceed the combined gross conditioned floor area of the three largest floors.

The following buildings or building sites shall comply with Section C405.15.2:

1. A building site located where an unshaded flat plate collector oriented toward the equator and tilted at an angle from horizontal equal to the latitude receives an annual daily average incident solar radiation less than 1.1 ktu/ft² - day (3.5 kWh/m² - day).
2. A building where more than 80 percent of the roof area is covered by any combination of permanent obstructions such as, but not limited to, mechanical equipment, vegetated space, access, pathways, or occupied roof terrace.
3. Any building where more than 50 percent of the roof area is shaded from direct-beam sunlight by natural objects or by structures that are not part of the building for more than 2500 annual hours between 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
4. A building with gross conditioned floor area less than 5,000 square feet (465 m²).

# C O

Buildings that qualify for one or more of the exceptions to Section 405.15.1 and do not meet the requirements of Section 405.15.1 either in part or in full, with an on-site renewable energy system, shall procure off-site renewable electrical energy, in accordance with C405.15.2.1 and C405.15.2.2, that shall not be less than the total off-site renewable electrical energy determined in accordance with Evaluation 4-14.

TREoff Total off-site renewable electrical energy in kilowatt-hours (kWh) to be procured in accordance with Table C405.15.2.
# Annual off-site renewable electrical energy from Table C405.15.2

in units of kilowatt-hours per watt of array capacity

# FLRA

the sum of the gross conditioned floor area of all floors not to exceed the combined floor area of the three largest floors

# IREon

Annual on-site renewable electrical energy generation of a new on-site renewable energy system, to be installed as part of the building project, whose rated capacity is less than the rated capacity required in Section C405.15.1
# Climate

# Annual Off-site Renewable Electrical Energy (kWh/W)

| 1A, 2, 3, 3C, 4, and 5    | 1.75 kWh/W |
| ------------------------- | ---------- |
| 0A, 0, 1, 2A, 3A, and 6   | 1.55 kWh/W |
| 4A, 4C, 5A, 5C, 6A, and 7 | 1.35 kWh/W |

The building owner as defined in the International Building Code shall procure and be credited for the total amount of off-site renewable electrical energy, not less than required in accordance with Evaluation 4-14, with one or more of the following:

1. A physical renewable energy power purchase agreement
2. A financial renewable energy power purchase agreement
3. A community renewable energy facility
4. Off-site renewable energy system owned by the building property owner

The renewable energy shall be delivered or credited to the building site under an energy contract with a duration of not less than 10 years. The contract shall be structured to survive a partial or full transfer of ownership of the building property. The total required off-site renewable electrical energy shall be procured in equal installments over the duration of the off-site contract.

The property owner or owner's authorized agent shall demonstrate that where RECs or EACs are associated with on-site and off-site renewable energy production required by Sections C405.15.1 and C405.15.2 all of the following criteria for RECs and EACs shall be met:

1. Are retained and retired by or on behalf of the property owner or tenant for a period of not less than 15 years or the duration of the contract in C405.15.2.2 whichever is less
2. Are created within a 12-month period of the use of the REC and
3. Are from a generating asset constructed no more than 5 years before the issuance of the certificate of occupancy.

A building that qualifies for one or more of the exceptions to Section C405.15.1 and where it can be demonstrated to the code official that the requirements of Section C405.15.2 cannot be met, the building owner shall contract for renewable electricity products complying with the Green-e Energy National Standard for Renewable Electricity products equivalent to five times the amount of total off-site renewable.
# Energy Storage Systems (ESS) Requirements

Energy calculated in accordance with Equation 4-14.

Buildings shall comply with one of C405.16.1 or C405.16.2.

# ESS Capacity Requirements

Each building shall have one or more ESS with a total rated energy capacity and rated power capacity as follows:

1. ESS rated energy capacity (kWh) = 1.0 x Installed PV System Rated Power (kWDC)
2. ESS rated power capacity (kW) = 0.25 x Installed PV System Rated Power (kWDC)

Where installed, DC coupled battery systems shall meet the requirements for rated energy capacity alone.

# ESS-Ready Areas

Each building shall have one or more reserved ESS-ready areas to accommodate future electrical storage complying with the following:

1. Energy storage system rated energy capacity (kWh) = Conditioned floor area of the three largest stories (ft²) x 0.0008 kWh/ft²
2. Energy storage system rated power capacity (kW) = Conditioned floor area of three largest stories (ft²) x 0.0002 kWh/ft²

# Location and Sizing of ESS-Ready Areas

Each ESS-ready area shall be located in accordance with Section 1207 of the International Fire Code.

Each ESS-ready area shall be sized in accordance with the spacing requirements of Section 1207 of the International Fire Code and the UL 540 or UL 540A designated rating of the planned system. Where rated to UL 540A, the installation shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.

# Electrical Distribution Equipment

The onsite electrical distribution equipment shall have sufficient capacity, rating, and space to allow installation of overcurrent devices and circuit wiring in accordance with NFPA 70 for future electrical ESS installation complying with the criteria of Section C405.16.2.
# O G T R IR T

# CTIO C

ITIO ICI CY R O G T

ta note ro osed ode anges to e isting C aving  een re oved y CE I are not in or orated into t is dra t

# C C

# C C

uildings shall comply as follows:

1. uildings with greater than 2000 square feet (186 m²) of floor area shall comply with Section C406.1.1.
2. uildings with greater than 5000 square feet (465 m²) of conditioned floor area shall comply with Sections C406.1.1 and C406.1.2.
3. uild-out construction greater than 1000 square feet (93 m²) of conditioned floor area that does not have final lighting or final HVAC systems installed under a prior building permit shall comply with Section C406.1.3.

Core and shell buildings where no less than 20 percent of the net floor area is without final lighting or final HVAC that comply with all of the following:

1. uildings with greater than 5000 (465 m²) of conditioned floor area shall comply with Section C406.1.2.
2. Portions of the building where the net floor area is without final lighting or final HVAC shall comply with Section C406.1.3.
3. Portions of the building where the net floor area has final lighting and final HVAC systems shall comply with C406.1.1.

# C C

uildings shall comply with measures from C406.2 to achieve not less than the number of required efficiency credits from Table C406.1.1 based on building occupancy group and climate zone.

Where a project contains multiple occupancies, credits in Table C406.1.1 from each building occupancy shall be weighted by the gross floor area to determine the weighted average project energy credits required. Accessory occupancies shall be included with the primary occupancy group for purposes of Section C406.

1. Unconditioned parking garages that achieve 50% of the credits required for use groups S-1 and S-2 in Table C406.1.1.
2. Portions of buildings devoted to manufacturing or industrial use.
| RGY CR IT R IR T Y I I G OCC P CY GRO P |                   | T  | C  |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
| --------------------------------------- | ----------------- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- |
|                                         | R-2, R-4, and I-1 | 65 | 66 | 67 | 77 | 80 | 86 | 80 | 81 | 0  | 86 | 0  | 0  | 86 | 0  | 0  | 70 | 8  | 80 | 78 |
|                                         | I-2               | 43 | 42 | 38 | 37 | 36 | 38 | 32 | 32 | 30 | 36 | 36 | 35 | 43 | 43 | 44 | 46 | 47 | 50 | 53 |
| R-1                                     | 63                | 62 | 66 | 65 | 70 | 71 | 77 | 80 | 84 | 81 | 83 | 88 | 85 | 86 | 0  | 83 | 87 | 87 | 85 |    |
|                                         | 62                | 62 | 64 | 66 | 66 | 65 | 64 | 64 | 68 | 70 | 72 | 74 | 71 | 73 | 77 | 71 | 74 | 74 | 71 |    |
|                                         | A-2               | 70 | 70 | 72 | 72 | 75 | 75 | 70 | 73 | 82 | 6  | 74 | 78 | 67 | 72 | 78 | 60 | 67 | 57 | 51 |
|                                         | 80                | 7  | 83 | 7  | 81 | 84 | 67 | 74 | 87 | 80 | 66 | 65 | 7  | 62 | 50 | 75 | 67 | 75 | 58 |    |
|                                         | E                 | 56 | 57 | 55 | 58 | 58 | 57 | 5  | 62 | 5  | 61 | 66 | 62 | 64 | 67 | 67 | 65 | 67 | 63 | 58 |
| S-1 and S-2                             | 61                | 60 | 61 | 60 | 58 | 57 | 44 | 54 | 62 | 85 | 68 | 75 | 0  | 82 | 72 | 0  | 8  | 0  | 0  |    |
|                                         | All Other         | 31 | 31 | 31 | 32 | 32 | 33 | 30 | 32 | 36 | 35 | 35 | 37 | 36 | 36 | 36 | 37 | 36 | 34 |    |

Where separate permits are issued for core and shell buildings and build-out construction, compliance shall be in accordance with the following requirements.

1. Core and shell buildings or portions of buildings shall comply with one of the following:
1. Where the permit includes a central HVAC system or service water heating system with chillers, heat pumps, boilers, service water heating equipment, or loop pumping systems with heat reflection, the project shall achieve not less than 50 percent of the energy credits required in Table C406.1.1 in accordance with Section C406.2.
2. Alternatively, the project shall achieve not less than 33 percent of the energy credits required in Table C406.1.1.
2. For core and shell buildings or portions of buildings the energy credits achieved shall be subject to the following adjustments:
1. Lighting measure credits shall be determined only for areas with final lighting installed.
2. Where HVAC or service water heating systems are designed to serve the entire building, full HVAC or service water heating measure credits shall be achieved.
3. Where HVAC or service water heating systems are designed to serve individual areas, HVAC or service water heating measure credits achieved shall be reduced in proportion to the floor area with final HVAC systems or final service water heating systems installed.
3. Build-out construction shall be deemed to comply with Section C406.1 where either:
1. Where heating and cooling generation are provided by a previously installed central system, the energy credits achieved in accordance with Section C406.2 under the build-out project are not less than 33 percent of the credits required in Table C406.1.1.
2. Where heating and cooling generation are provided by an HVAC system
# 3.3

Where the core and shell building was approved in accordance with C407 under 2021 IECC or later.

# C

Buildings shall comply with measures from C406.3 to achieve not less than the number of required renewable and load management credits from Table C406.1.2 based on building occupancy group and climate zone. Where a project contains multiple occupancies, credits in Table C406.1.2 from each building occupancy shall be weighted by the gross floor area to determine the weighted average project energy credits required. Accessory occupancies shall be included with the primary occupancy group for purposes of Section C406.
# Current Page

|   | T                 | C  | R  | O  | G  | T  | C  | R  | I  | R  | I  | T  | Y  | I  | I  | G  |    |    |    |    |
| - | ----------------- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- |
| O | R-2, R-4, and I-1 | 64 | 5  | 70 | 6  | 73 | 8  | 72 | 0  | 0  | 63 | 0  | 70 | 51 | 75 | 66 | 48 | 48 | 50 | 42 |
|   | I-2               | 31 | 32 | 33 | 32 | 33 | 36 | 31 | 40 | 34 | 32 | 43 | 32 | 2  | 37 | 33 | 34 | 34 | 27 | 23 |
|   | R-1               | 41 | 40 | 48 | 44 | 48 | 58 | 54 | 61 | 63 | 50 | 61 | 47 | 42 | 55 | 50 | 41 | 41 | 40 | 32 |
|   |                   | 63 | 64 | 74 | 75 | 78 | 8  | 83 | 0  | 0  | 77 | 0  | 86 | 68 | 0  | 83 | 72 | 72 | 68 | 58 |
|   | A-2               | 12 | 12 | 13 | 13 | 12 | 17 | 13 | 17 | 17 | 12 | 17 | 13 | 12 | 12 | 12 | 12 | 12 | 8  | 7  |
|   |                   | 71 | 70 | 84 | 84 | 0  | 0  | 0  | 0  | 0  | 81 | 0  | 0  | 77 | 0  | 0  | 76 | 76 | 71 | 58 |
|   | E                 | 4  | 55 | 64 | 61 | 6  | 83 | 73 | 0  | 0  | 67 | 0  | 75 | 61 | 86 | 74 | 66 | 66 | 60 | 47 |
|   | S-1 and S-2       | 0  | 0  | 0  | 0  | 0  | 0  | 0  | 0  | 0  | 0  | 70 | 0  | 0  | 61 | 61 | 61 | 53 |    |    |
|   | All Other         | 56 | 55 | 66 | 63 | 6  | 80 | 6  | 87 | 88 | 5  | 86 | 68 | 51 | 72 | 66 | 51 | 51 | 48 | 40 |

The building envelope, equipment, and systems in alterations to buildings exceeding 5000 square feet (46.5 m²) of gross conditioned floor area shall comply with the requirements of Section C406.1.1 and C406.1.2 where the alteration includes replacement of two or more of the following:

1. HVAC unitary systems or HVAC central heating or cooling equipment serving the alteration area, not including ductwork or piping.
2. 80% or more of the lighting fixtures in the alteration area.
3. Building envelope components in the alteration area including new exterior cladding, fenestration, or insulation.

Energy credits achieved for the project shall be the sum of measure energy credits for individual measures included in the project. Credits are available for the measures listed in Section C406.2. Base energy credits are shown in Tables C406.1.4(1) through C406.1.4( ) based on building occupancies and climate zones. Measure energy credits achieved shall be determined in one of three ways, depending on the measure:

1. The measure energy credit shall be the base energy credit for the measure where no adjustment factor or formula is shown in the measure description in Section C406.2.
2. The measure energy credit shall be the base energy credit for the measure adjusted by a factor or formula as stated in the measure description in Section C406.2. Where adjustments are applied, each measure energy credit shall be rounded to the nearest whole number.
3. The measure energy credit shall be by direct formula as stated in the measure description in Section C406.2, where each individual measure credit shall be rounded to.
Each energy efficiency credit measure used to meet credit requirements for the project shall have efficiency that is greater than the requirements in Sections C402 through C405. Measures installed in the project that meet the requirements in Sections C406.2.1 through C406.2.7 shall achieve the base credits listed for the measure and occupancy type in Tables C406.2(1) through C406.2( ) or, where calculations required by Sections C406.2.1 through C406.2.7 create or modify the table credits, the credits achieved shall be based upon the calculations. Energy credits achieved for measures shall be determined by one of the following, as applicable:

1. The measure’s energy credit shall be the base energy credit for the measure where no adjustment factor or calculation is included in the description of the measure in Section C406.2.
2. The measure’s energy credit shall be the base energy credit for the measure adjusted by a factor or evaluation as stated in the description of the measure in Section C406.2. Where adjustments are applied, each measure’s energy credit shall be rounded to the nearest whole number.
3. The measure’s energy credit shall be calculated as stated in the measure’s description in Section C406.2, where each individual measure credit shall be rounded to the nearest whole number.

Energy credits achieved for the project shall be the sum of the individual measure’s energy credits. Credits are available for the measures listed in this Section. Where a project contains multiple building occupancy groups:

1. Credits achieved for each occupancy group shall be summed and then weighted by the floor area of each occupancy group to determine the weighted average project energy credits achieved.
2. Credits for improved envelope efficiency and lighting reduction (L06) shall be determined for the building or permitted floor area as a whole. Credits for other measures shall be taken from applicable tables or calculations weighted by the building occupancy group floor area.
|     | T                          | C          | RGY CR IT OR GRO P R R I OCC P CI                |    |    |    |    |    |    |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |    |
| --- | -------------------------- | ---------- | ------------------------------------------------ | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | -- | --- | -- |
|     | 0A                         | 1A         | 2A                                               | 3A | 3  | 3C | 4A | 4  | 4C | 5A  | 5   | 5C  | 6A  | 6   | 7   | 8   |     |     |    |     |    |
| E01 | Envelope                   | C406.2.1.1 | Determined in accordance with Section C406.2.1.1 |    |    |    |    |    |    |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |    |
| E02 | Performance reduction      | C406.2.1.2 | 8                                                | 13 | 7  | 11 | 6  | 8  | 6  | 1   | 24  | 8   | 30  | 15  | 5   | 32  | 28  | 31  | 36 |     |    |
| E03 | Envelope leak reduction    | C406.2.1.3 | 15                                               | 10 | 12 | 8  | 6  | 16 | 13 | 5   | 1   | 7   | 7   | 65  | 16  | 1   | 73  | 43  | 52 | 26  |    |
| E04 | Add Roof Insulation        | C406.2.1.4 | 1                                                | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 4  | 3   | 1   | 5   | 3   | 4   | 6   | 5   | 1   | 7   | 7  | 6   | 8  |
| E05 | Add Wall Insulation        | C406.2.1.5 | 10                                               | 10 | 6  | 8  | 5  | 6  | 8  | 4   | 1   | 8   | 3   | 4   | 11  | 7   | 1   | 14  | 12 | 13  | 13 |
| E06 | Improve Fenestration       | C406.2.1.6 | 7                                                | 7  | 4  | 6  | 11 | 13 | 3  | 1   | 22  | 5   | 10  | 27  | 18  | 7   | 41  | 33  | 22 | 21  |    |
| H01 | HVAC Performance           | C406.2.2.1 | 20                                               | 1  | 16 | 17 | 14 | 13 | 11 | 11  | 5   | 13  | 10  | 8   | 15  | 12  | 7   | 18  | 14 | 17  | 1  |
| H02 | Heating efficiency         | C406.2.2.2 | x                                                | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | 3  | 1   | 1   | 6   | 2   | 3   | 10  | 5   | 2   | 14  | 10 | 13  | 16 |
| H03 | Cooling efficiency         | C406.2.2.3 | 7                                                | 6  | 4  | 4  | 3  | 3  | 1  | 1   | 1   | 1   | 1   | 1   | x   | x   | x   | x   | x  |     |    |
| H04 | Residential HVAC control   | C406.2.2.4 | 10                                               | 8  | 22 | 20 | 25 | 16 | 17 | 32  | 21  | 24  | 17  | 23  | 27  | 16  | 21  | 24  | 18 | 18  |    |
| H05 | DOAS/fan control           | C406.2.2.5 | 32                                               | 31 | 27 | 28 | 23 | 23 | 28 | 21  | 12  | 42  | 24  | 24  | 56  | 36  | 1   | 73  | 54 | 70  | 7  |
| W01 | SHW preheat recovery       | C406.2.3.1 | a                                                | 61 | 63 | 74 | 74 | 85 | 88 | 101 | 100 | 121 | 103 | 10  | 122 | 102 | 111 | 130 | 3  | 106 | 6  |
| W02 | Heat pump water heater     | C406.2.3.1 | 50                                               | 52 | 62 | 61 | 72 | 74 | 86 | 85  | 104 | 88  | 4   | 106 | 88  | 6   | 112 | 81  | 2  | 87  | 84 |
| W03 | Efficient gas water heater | C406.2.3.1 | 38                                               | 3  | 46 | 46 | 53 | 55 | 63 | 62  | 76  | 64  | 68  | 76  | 64  | 6   | 81  | 58  | 66 | 62  | 60 |
| W04 | SHW pipe insulation        | C406.2.3.2 | 7                                                | 7  | 8  | 7  | 8  | 8  | 8  |     | 10  | 8   |     | 7   | 8   | 6   | 7   | 6   | 6  |     |    |
| W05 | Point of use water heaters | C406.2.3.3 | a                                                | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x   | x   | x   | x   | x   | x   | x   | x   | x   | x  |     |    |
| W06 | Thermostatic bal. valves   | C406.2.3.3 | 3                                                | 3  | 3  | 3  | 3  | 3  | 3  | 4   | 3   | 3   | 4   | 3   | 3   | 4   | 3   | 3   | 3  | 2   |    |
| W07 | SHW heat trace system      | C406.2.3.3 | 12                                               | 12 | 13 | 13 | 14 | 15 | 15 | 15  | 18  | 14  | 15  | 16  | 13  | 14  | 16  | 11  | 13 | 11  | 10 |
| W08 | SHW submeters              | C406.2.3.4 | 11                                               | 11 | 13 | 13 | 15 | 16 | 18 | 18  | 22  | 1   | 20  | 22  | 1   | 20  | 24  | 17  | 20 | 18  | 18 |

# SHW

| distribution               | C406.2.3.5 | 45 | 46 | 55 | 54 | 63 | 65 | 74 | 73 | 8  | 75 | 80 | 8  | 74 | 81 | 5  | 68 | 77 | 72 | 70 |
| -------------------------- | ---------- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- |
| Shower heat recovery       | C406.2.3.6 | 15 | 16 | 1  | 1  | 22 | 23 | 26 | 26 | 32 | 27 | 2  | 32 | 27 | 2  | 34 | 25 | 28 | 27 | 26 |
| Energy monitoring          | C406.2.4   | 3  | 3  | 2  | 3  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 3  | 2  | 2  | 3  |    |
| Lighting Performance       | C406.2.5.1 | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  |    |
| Lighting dimming           | C406.2.5.2 | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  |    |
| Increase occp. sensor      | C406.2.5.3 | 3  | 3  | 4  | 4  | 4  | 4  | 3  | 4  | 3  | 2  | 3  | 2  | 1  | 1  | 2  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  |
| Increase daylight area     | C406.2.5.4 | 5  | 5  | 5  | 5  | 5  | 5  | 4  | 4  | 4  | 4  | 4  | 3  | 3  | 4  | 3  | 2  | 3  | 3  | 2  |
| Residential light control  | C406.2.5.5 | 8  | 8  |    |    | 8  | 8  | 10 | 6  | 8  | 7  | 4  | 6  | 8  | 3  | 5  | 4  | 3  |    |    |
| Light power reduction      | C406.2.5.7 | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 1  | 2  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  |    |
| Efficient elevator         | C406.2.7.1 | 4  | 4  | 4  | 4  | 5  | 5  | 5  | 5  | 5  | 4  | 5  | 5  | 4  | 4  | 5  | 4  | 4  | 4  | 3  |
| Commercial kitchen equip.  | C406.2.7.2 | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  |    |
| Residential kitchen equip. | C406.2.7.3 | 15 | 15 | 17 | 16 | 17 | 18 | 17 | 18 | 20 | 16 | 17 | 18 | 15 | 16 | 18 | 13 | 15 | 13 | 12 |
| Fault detection            | C406.2.7.4 | 3  | 3  | 2  | 3  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 1  | 2  | 2  | 1  | 1  | 2  | 1  | 3  | 2  | 3  | 3  |

a. x indicates credit is not available for that measure.
| E01         | Envelope      | C406.2.1.1 | Determined in accordance with Section C406.2.1.1 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |   |   |    |   |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |   |
| ----------- | ------------- | ---------- | ------------------------------------------------ | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | - | - | -- | - | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | - |
| Performance | UA            |            |                                                  |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |   |   |    |   |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |   |
| E02         | reduction     | C406.2.1.2 | 6                                                | 11 | 6  | 11 | 7  | 6  | 6  | 2  |   | 3 | 3  | 3 | 4  | 3  | 7  | 5  | 5  | 17 | 3  |   |
| E03         | leak          | C406.2.1.3 | 5                                                | 3  | 4  | 3  | 5  | 8  | 8  | 3  | 2 |   | 6  | 2 | 2  | 7  | 3  | 1  | 7  | 1  | 5  |   |
| E04         | Add Roof      | C406.2.1.4 | 1                                                | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  |   | 1 | 1  | 1 | 2  | 1  | 1  | 2  | 1  | 2  | 3  |   |
| E05         | Add Wall      | C406.2.1.5 | 1                                                | 3  | 1  | 3  | 2  | 2  |    | 4  | 1 | 1 | 3  | 1 | 1  | 3  | 3  | 3  | 3  |    |    |   |
| E06         | Improve       | C406.2.1.6 | 1                                                | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  |   | 4 | 3  | 5 | 5  | 1  | 1  | 5  | 5  | 2  | 2  |   |
| H01         | HVAC          | C406.2.2.1 | x                                                | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  |   | x | x  | x | x  | x  | x  | x  |    |    |    |   |
| H02         | Heating       | C406.2.2.2 | x                                                | x  | x  | x  | 2  | 3  | 4  | 3  | 7 |   | 6  | 4 | 6  | 8  | 6  | 10 | 11 | 12 | 15 | 1 |
| H03         | Cooling       | C406.2.2.3 | 6                                                | 6  | 4  | 4  | 3  | 3  | 2  | 2  | 1 |   | 1  | 1 | 1  | 1  | 1  | x  | x  | x  | x  |   |
| H04         | HVAC          | C406.2.2.4 | x                                                | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  |   | x | x  | x | x  | x  | x  | x  |    |    |    |   |
| H05         | DOAS/fan      | C406.2.2.5 | 41                                               | 41 | 40 | 40 | 42 | 36 | 42 | 37 | 3 | 4 | 40 |   | 46 | 56 | 46 | 61 | 65 | 68 | 82 | 3 |
| W01         | SHW           | C406.2.3.1 | preheat                                          | 4  | 4  | 4  | 4  | 5  | 5  | 5  | 5 | 6 |    | 6 | 6  | 6  | 6  | 6  | 6  | 5  | 5  | 5 |
| W02         | Heat pump     | C406.2.3.1 | 2                                                | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 3  | 3  | 3 |   | 3  | 3 | 3  | 3  | 3  | 3  | 3  | 3  |    |   |
| W03         | Efficient gas | C406.2.3.1 | 2                                                | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 3  | 3  | 3  |   | 3 | 3  | 3 | 3  | 3  | 3  | 3  | 3  |    |    |   |
| W04         | SHW pipe      | C406.2.3.2 | 1                                                | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  |   | 1 | 1  | 1 | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  |    |    |    |   |
| W05         | Point of use  | C406.2.3.3 | water                                            | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x | x |    | x | x  | x  | x  |    |    |    |    |   |
| W06         | Thermostatic  | C406.2.3.3 | 1                                                | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  |   | 1 | 1  | 1 | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  |    |    |    |   |

# W07

SHW heat

| C406.2.3.3 | 1 | 1 | 2 | 2 | 2 | 2 | 2 | 2 | 2 | 2 | 2 | 2 | 2 | 2 | 2 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 |
| ---------- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |

# W08

SHW

| C406.2.3.4 | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x |
| ---------- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |

submeters

# W0

SHW flow

| C406.2.3.5 | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x |
| ---------- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |

reduction

# W10

Shower heat

| C406.2.3.6 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 |
| ---------- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |

recovery

# P01

Energy

| C406.2.4 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 |
| -------- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |

monitoring

# L01

Lighting

| C406.2.5.1 | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x |
| ---------- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |

Performance

# L02

dimming

| C406.2.5.2 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 6 | 5 | 6 | 6 | 5 | 6 | 6 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 4 | 4 | 3 | 2 |
| ---------- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |

tuning

# L03

Increase

| C406.2.5.3 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 6 | 5 | 5 | 6 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 4 | 4 | 3 | 2 |
| ---------- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |

occp. sensor

# L04

Increase

| C406.2.5.4 | 7 | 7 | 7 | 7 | 7 | 7 | 7 | 8 | 6 | 6 | 6 | 6 | 6 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 4 |
| ---------- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |

daylight area

# L05

Residential

| C406.2.5.5 | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x |
| ---------- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |

light control

# L06

Light power

| C406.2.5.7 | 7 | 7 | 7 | 7 | 7 | 7 | 7 |   | 7 | 7 | 8 | 6 | 7 | 7 | 5 | 5 | 4 | 3 |
| ---------- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |

reduction

# 01

Efficient

| C406.2.7.1 | 1 | 2 | 2 | 2 | 2 | 2 | 2 | 2 | 2 | 2 | 2 | 2 | 2 | 2 | 2 | 2 | 1 | 1 |
| ---------- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |

elevator

# 02

Commercial

| C406.2.7.2 | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x |
| ---------- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |

kitchen e uip.

# 03

Residential

| C406.2.7.3 | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x |
| ---------- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |

kitchen e uip.

# 04

Fault

| C406.2.7.4 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 2 | 3 | 3 | 2 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 4 | 4 |
| ---------- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |

detection

a. x indicates credit is not available for that measure.
| E01         | Envelope      | C406.2.1.1 | Determined in accordance with Section C406.2.1.1 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |   |   |   |
| ----------- | ------------- | ---------- | ------------------------------------------------ | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | - | - | - |
| Performance | UA            |            |                                                  |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |   |   |   |
| E02         | reduction     | C406.2.1.2 | 4                                                | 7  | 4  | 7  | 3  | 4  | 7  | 2  | 1  |    |    |    |    |   |   |   |
| E03         | leakage       | C406.2.1.3 | 5                                                | 3  | 4  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 5  | 1  | 1  |    |    |    |    |   |   |   |
| E04         | Add Roof      | C406.2.1.4 | 2                                                | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 3  | 2  | 1  |    |    |    |    |   |   |   |
| E05         | Add Wall      | C406.2.1.5 | 13                                               | 14 | 8  | 11 | 4  | 4  | 7  | 4  | 1  |    |    |    |    |   |   |   |
| E06         | Improve       | C406.2.1.6 | 5                                                | 5  | 4  | 5  | 7  | 7  | 8  | 2  | 1  |    |    |    |    |   |   |   |
| H01         | HVAC          | C406.2.2.1 | 21                                               | 20 | 17 | 18 | 16 | 13 | 12 | 12 | 11 |    |    |    |    |   |   |   |
| H02         | Heating       | C406.2.2.2 | x                                                | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | 1  | 1  | 6  |    |    |    |    |   |   |   |
| H03         | Cooling       | C406.2.2.3 | 7                                                | 6  | 4  | 4  | 3  | 2  | 1  | 2  | 1  |    |    |    |    |   |   |   |
| H04         | HVAC          | C406.2.2.4 | x                                                | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  |    |    |    |    |    |   |   |   |
| H05         | DOAS/fan      | C406.2.2.5 | 32                                               | 30 | 26 | 28 | 25 | 23 | 24 | 22 | 28 | 26 | 22 |    |    |   |   |   |
| W01         | SHW           | C406.2.3.1 | preheat                                          | a  | 18 | 1  | 22 | 22 | 25 | 27 | 31 | 21 | 32 | 34 | 34 |   |   |   |
| W02         | Heat pump     | C406.2.3.1 | water heater                                     | b  | 14 | 15 | 18 | 17 | 20 | 22 | 25 | 25 | 27 | 2  | 2  |   |   |   |
| W03         | Efficient gas | C406.2.3.1 | water heater                                     | c  | 11 | 12 | 14 | 14 | 16 | 17 | 1  | 1  | 20 | 21 | 21 |   |   |   |
| W04         | SHW pipe      | C406.2.3.2 | insulation                                       |    | 3  | 3  | 4  | 3  | 4  | 4  | 4  | 4  | 4  | 4  | 4  | 3 |   |   |
| W05         | Point of use  | C406.2.3.3 | water                                            | a  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x |   |   |
| W06         | Thermostatic  | C406.2.3.3 | bal. valves                                      | b  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2 | 1 | 1 |

| W07 | SHW heat    | C406.2.3.3 | 5  | 6  | 6  | 6  | 6  | 7  | 7  | 7  | 7  | 7  | 8  | 7  | 7  | 8  | 7  | 7  | 6  | 6  |    |
| --- | ----------- | ---------- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- |
| W08 | SHW         | C406.2.3.4 | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  |    |
| W0  | SHW flow    | C406.2.3.5 | 13 | 14 | 16 | 16 | 18 | 20 | 22 | 22 | 23 | 25 | 25 | 28 | 27 | 26 | 2  | 26 | 27 | 26 | 25 |
| W10 | Shower heat | C406.2.3.6 |    | 4  | 5  | 5  | 5  | 6  | 7  | 8  | 8  | 8  |    | 10 | 10 | 10 | 10 | 10 |    |    |    |
| P01 | Energy      | C406.2.4   | 3  | 3  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  |    |
| L01 | Lighting    | C406.2.5.1 | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  |    |    |
| L02 | dimming     | C406.2.5.2 | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  |    |    |
| L03 | Increase    | C406.2.5.3 | 3  | 3  | 3  | 3  | 3  | 3  | 3  | 4  | 2  | 3  | 2  | 2  | 3  | 2  | 2  | 1  | 1  |    |    |
| L04 | Increase    | C406.2.5.4 | 4  | 5  | 5  | 4  | 5  | 5  | 4  | 4  | 4  | 5  | 4  | 4  | 3  | 4  | 3  | 3  | 3  | 2  |    |
| L05 | Residential | C406.2.5.5 | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  |    |    |
| L06 | Light power | C406.2.5.7 | 1  | 1  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 1  | 2  | 1  | 1  | 2  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  |    |    |
| 01  | Efficient   | C406.2.7.1 | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 3  | 3  | 3  | 3  | 3  | 3  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  |    |    |
| 02  | Commercial  | C406.2.7.2 | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  |    |    |
| 03  | Residential | C406.2.7.3 |    | 10 | 10 | 11 | 11 | 11 | 11 | 11 | 12 | 11 | 11 | 12 | 10 | 11 | 10 |    |    |    |    |
| 04  | Fault       | C406.2.7.4 | 3  | 3  | 3  | 3  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 1  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  |    |

a. x indicates credit is not available for that measure.
| E01         | Envelope                   | C406.2.1.1 | Determined in accordance with Section C406.2.1.1 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |   |
| ----------- | -------------------------- | ---------- | ------------------------------------------------ | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | - |
| Performance | UA                         | 4          | 7                                                | 4  | 7  | 3  | 4  | 7  | 2  | 0  | 7  | 2  | 3  | 10 | 6  | 4  | 12 | 1  | 11 |    |    |   |
| E02         | reduction                  | C406.2.1.2 | 5                                                | 3  | 4  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 5  | 1  | 0  | 8  | 0  | 2  | 13 | 4  | 0  | 18 | 18 | 7  |    |   |
| E03         | leak                       | C406.2.1.3 | 2                                                | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 3  | 2  | 1  | 3  | 1  | 2  | 3  | 2  | 2  | 3  | 3  | 2  | 3  |   |
| E04         | Add Roof Insulation        | C406.2.1.4 | 13                                               | 14 | 8  | 11 | 4  | 4  | 7  | 4  | 1  | 5  | 2  | 4  | 6  | 4  | 3  | 7  | 10 | 8  |    |   |
| E05         | Add Wall Insulation        | C406.2.1.5 | 5                                                | 5  | 4  | 5  | 7  | 7  | 8  | 2  | 1  | 8  | 2  | 4  | 10 | 5  | 1  | 21 | 17 | 10 |    |   |
| E06         | Improve Fenestration       | C406.2.1.6 | 22                                               | 22 | 1  | 20 | 17 | 17 | 15 | 15 | 11 | 15 | 15 | 11 | 16 | 15 | 11 | 1  | 17 | 18 | 20 |   |
| H01         | HVAC Performance           | C406.2.2.1 | x                                                | x  | x  | x  | x  | 1  | 1  | 3  | 2  | 2  | 5  | 4  | 3  |    | 7  | 8  | 12 |    |    |   |
| H02         | Heating efficiency         | C406.2.2.2 | 7                                                | 6  | 4  | 5  | 3  | 3  | 1  | 2  | 1  | 1  | 1  | x  | x  | x  | x  |    |    |    |    |   |
| H03         | Cooling efficiency         | C406.2.2.3 | x                                                | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  |    |    |    |    |   |
| H04         | Residential HVAC control   | C406.2.2.4 | 31                                               | 31 | 27 | 2  | 25 | 25 | 28 | 26 | 18 | 35 | 28 | 28 | 47 | 38 | 2  | 64 | 53 | 58 | 74 |   |
| W01         | SHW preheat recovery       | C406.2.3.1 | a                                                | 8  | 10 | 11 | 11 | 12 | 12 | 14 | 13 | 13 | 14 | 13 | 13 | 15 | 12 | 13 | 14 | 14 |    |   |
| W02         | Heat pump water heater     | C406.2.3.1 | 3                                                | 3  | 3  | 3  | 4  | 4  | 5  | 4  | 5  | 5  | 6  | 5  | 5  | 6  | 5  | 5  | 6  | 6  |    |   |
| W03         | Efficient gas water heater | C406.2.3.1 | 5                                                | 5  | 6  | 6  | 7  | 7  | 8  | 7  | 8  | 8  | 8  | 8  | 8  | 8  | 8  | 8  | 8  |    |    |   |
| W04         | SHW pipe insulation        | C406.2.3.2 | 3                                                | 3  | 4  | 4  | 4  | 4  | 4  | 4  | 5  | 4  | 4  | 5  | 4  | 4  | 4  | 4  | 4  | 4  |    |   |
| W05         | Point of use water heaters | C406.2.3.3 | a                                                | 12 | 15 | 17 | 16 | 18 | 18 | 1  | 1  | 22 | 20 | 20 | 22 | 20 | 20 | 22 | 18 | 1  | 20 | 1 |
| W06         | Thermostatic bal. valves   | C406.2.3.3 | b                                                | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  |    |   |

# W07

SHW heat

| C406.2.3.3 | 4 | 4 | 4 | 4 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 6 | 5 | 5 | 6 | 5 | 5 | 6 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 5 |
| ---------- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |

# W08

SHW

| C406.2.3.4 | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x |
| ---------- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |

# W0

SHW flow

| C406.2.3.5 | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x |
| ---------- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |

# W10

Shower heat

| C406.2.3.6 | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x |
| ---------- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |

# P01

Energy

| C406.2.4 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 |
| -------- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |

# L01

Lighting

| C406.2.5.1 | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x |
| ---------- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |

# L02

dimming

| C406.2.5.2 | 5 | 5 | 6 | 6 | 6 | 6 | 6 | 6 | 7 | 6 | 6 | 6 | 5 | 5 | 6 | 4 | 5 | 3 | 2 |
| ---------- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |

# L03

Increase

| C406.2.5.3 | 5 | 6 | 6 | 6 | 6 | 6 | 6 | 8 | 6 | 6 | 6 | 5 | 5 | 6 | 4 | 5 | 4 | 3 |
| ---------- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |

# L04

Increase

| C406.2.5.4 | 7 | 7 | 8 | 8 | 8 | 8 | 8 | 8 |   | 6 | 7 | 7 | 6 | 6 | 6 | 6 | 6 | 7 | 5 |
| ---------- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |

# L05

Residential

| C406.2.5.5 | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x |
| ---------- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |

# L06

Light power

| C406.2.5.7 | 7 | 7 | 8 | 8 | 8 | 8 | 8 |   | 7 | 8 | 8 | 6 | 7 | 8 | 5 | 6 | 5 | 3 |
| ---------- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |

# 01

Efficient

| C406.2.7.1 | 4 | 4 | 4 | 4 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 4 | 5 | 4 | 4 |
| ---------- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |

# 02

Commercial

kitchen

| C406.2.7.2 | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x |
| ---------- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |

# 03

Residential

kitchen

| C406.2.7.3 | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x |
| ---------- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |

# 04

Fault

| C406.2.7.4 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 2 | 2 | 2 | 2 | 2 | 2 | 2 | 2 | 2 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 |
| ---------- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |

a. x indicates measure is not available for building occupancy in that climate one.
| E01           | Envelope     | C406.2.1.1 | Determined in accordance with Section C406.2.1.1 Performance |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |     |    |
| ------------- | ------------ | ---------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | --- | -- |
| reduction     | C406.2.1.2   | 1          | 1                                                            | 1  | 1  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 1  | 1  | 4  | 5  | 26 | 7  | 3  | 33 | 23 | 2  | 13 |    |     |    |
| E02           | leak         | C406.2.1.3 | 2                                                            | 1  | 1  | 1  | 2  | 3  | 11 | 2  | 1  | 24 | 4  | 6  | 33 | 3  | 42 | 2  | 36 | 16 |     |    |
| Add Roof      | C406.2.1.4   | 1          | 1                                                            | 0  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 2  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 2  | 2  | 1  | 2  | 2  | 1  | 2  |     |    |
| E03           | Add Wall     | C406.2.1.5 | 1                                                            | 1  | 0  | 1  | 1  | 2  | 3  | 3  | 1  | 2  | 1  | 1  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  |     |    |
| Improve       | C406.2.1.6   | 1          | 1                                                            | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 2  | 2  | 1  | 1  | 2  | 2  | 3  | 2  | 1  | 4  | 4  | 1  | 1  |     |    |
| H01           | HVAC         | C406.2.2.1 | x                                                            |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |     |    |
| Heating       | C406.2.2.2   | x          | x                                                            | x  | x  | 1  | 1  | 6  | 3  | 3  | 10 | 6  | 8  | 15 | 11 | 10 | 1  | 15 | 23 | 28 |     |    |
| H02           | Cooling      | C406.2.2.3 | 6                                                            | 5  | 3  | 4  | 3  | 2  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | x  | x  | x  | x  |    |     |    |
| Residential   | C406.2.2.4   | x          |                                                              |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |     |    |
| H03           | DOAS/fan     | C406.2.2.5 | 2                                                            | 27 | 20 | 25 | 24 | 21 | 36 | 27 | 15 | 51 | 35 | 38 | 67 | 53 | 45 | 84 | 70 | 7  | 115 |    |
| SHW           | C406.2.3.1   | preheat    | a                                                            | 24 | 26 | 31 | 2  | 33 | 35 | 37 | 38 | 45 | 38 | 41 | 44 | 37 | 40 | 44 | 34 | 38 | 33  | 30 |
| W01           | Heat pump    | C406.2.3.1 | 15                                                           | 16 | 1  | 18 | 21 | 23 | 25 | 25 | 2  | 26 | 28 | 30 | 26 | 28 | 31 | 25 | 27 | 24 | 22  |    |
| Efficient gas | C406.2.3.1   | 15         | 16                                                           | 1  | 18 | 21 | 22 | 23 | 24 | 28 | 24 | 25 | 27 | 23 | 25 | 27 | 21 | 24 | 21 | 18 |     |    |
| W02           | SHW pipe     | C406.2.3.2 | 2                                                            | 3  | 3  | 3  | 3  | 3  | 3  | 3  | 3  | 3  | 2  | 3  | 3  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  |    |     |    |
| Point of use  | C406.2.3.3   | a          | x                                                            | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  |     |    |
| W03           | Thermostatic | C406.2.3.3 | 1                                                            | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  |     |    |

| W07 | SHW heat    | C406.2.3.3 | 3  | 4  | 4  | 4  | 4  | 4 | 4  | 4 | 4  | 4  | 3  | 4 | 4  | 3  | 3  | 3  | 3  |   |    |
| --- | ----------- | ---------- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | - | -- | - | -- | -- | -- | - | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | - | -- |
| W08 | SHW         | C406.2.3.4 | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x | x  | x | x  | x  | x  | x | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  |   |    |
| W0  | SHW flow    | C406.2.3.5 | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x | x  | x | x  | x  | x  | x | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  |   |    |
| W10 | Shower heat | C406.2.3.6 | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x | x  | x | x  | x  | x  | x | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  |   |    |
| P01 | Energy      | C406.2.4   | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 1 | 2  | 1 | 1  | 2  | 2  | 1 | 2  | 2  | 2  | 3  |    |   |    |
| L01 | Lighting    | C406.2.5.1 | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x | x  | x | x  | x  | x  | x | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  |   |    |
| L02 | dimming     | C406.2.5.2 | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2 | 2  | 2 | 2  | 2  | 1  | 2 | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 0  |   |    |
| L03 | Increase    | C406.2.5.3 | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2 | 2  | 1 | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1 | 1  | 1  | 1  | 0  |    |   |    |
| L04 | Increase    | C406.2.5.4 | 3  | 3  | 3  | 3  | 3  | 3 | 2  | 2 | 2  | 2  | 2  | 1 | 2  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1 |    |
| L05 | Residential | C406.2.5.5 | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x | x  | x | x  | x  | x  | x | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  |   |    |
| L06 | Light power | C406.2.5.7 | 3  | 3  | 3  | 3  | 3  | 3 | 3  | 2 | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2 | 2  | 1  | 2  | 1  | 1  |   |    |
| 01  | Efficient   | C406.2.7.1 | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1 | 1  | 1 | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1 | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  |   |    |
| 02  | Commercial  | C406.2.7.2 | 24 | 26 | 28 | 27 | 28 | 2 | 27 | 2 | 32 | 26 | 28 | 2 | 24 | 26 | 28 | 21 | 23 | 1 | 17 |
| 03  | Residential | C406.2.7.3 | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x | x  | x | x  | x  | x  | x | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  |   |    |
| 04  | Fault       | C406.2.7.4 | 3  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2 | 2  | 1 | 2  | 2  | 1  | 2 | 2  | 3  | 2  | 3  | 4  |   |    |

a. x indicates measure is not available for that measure.
| E01         | Envelope      | C406.2.1.1 | Determined in accordance with Section C406.2.1.1 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |     |    |    |     |     |     |     |
| ----------- | ------------- | ---------- | ------------------------------------------------ | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | --- | -- | -- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Performance | UA            | 0A         | 1A                                               | 2A | 3A | 3C | 4A | 4C | 5A | 5  | 5C | 6A | 6  | 7  | 8   |    |    |     |     |     |     |
| E02         | reduction     | C406.2.1.2 | 2                                                | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 3  | 15 | 2  | 1  | 36 | 5  | 45 | 11  | 5  | 51 | 36  | 35  | 15  |     |
| E03         | leak          | C406.2.1.3 | 3                                                | 3  | 2  | 2  | 3  | 3  | 1  | 3  | 1  | 44 | 6  | 11 | 56  | 13 | 6  | 64  | 44  | 43  | 1   |
| E04         | Add Roof      | C406.2.1.4 | 8                                                | 6  | 5  | 7  | 7  | 7  | 18 | 16 | 4  | 1  | 18 | 20 | 21  | 22 | 23 | 24  | 26  | 24  | 30  |
| E05         | Add Wall      | C406.2.1.5 | 64                                               | 65 | 48 | 62 | 13 | 15 | 23 | 18 | 4  | 27 | 21 | 27 | 25  | 24 | 25 | 23  | 24  | 24  | 16  |
| E06         | Improve       | C406.2.1.6 | 4                                                | 3  | 3  | 3  | 4  | 4  | 6  | 5  | 2  | 7  | 5  | 7  | 5   | 7  | 10 | 10  | 3   | 3   |     |
| H01         | HVAC          | C406.2.2.1 | 31                                               | 30 | 26 | 28 | 23 | 21 | 23 | 20 | 14 | 27 | 21 | 22 | 2   | 25 | 23 | 32  | 28  | 30  | 33  |
| H02         | Heating       | C406.2.2.2 | x                                                | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | 10 | 3  | 1  | 1  | 8  | 15 | 26  | 17 | 18 | 2   | 24  | 27  | 31  |
| H03         | Cooling       | C406.2.2.3 | 10                                               |    | 7  | 7  | 5  | 4  | 2  | 2  | 1  | 1  | 2  | 1  | 1   | 1  | x  | x   | x   | x   |     |
| H04         | Residential   | C406.2.2.4 | x                                                | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x   | x  | x  | x   | x   | x   |     |
| H05         | DOAS/fan      | C406.2.2.5 | 48                                               | 48 | 42 | 47 | 40 | 38 | 66 | 46 | 31 | 8  | 61 | 82 | 120 | 1  | 0  | 134 | 115 | 125 | 141 |
| W01         | SHW           | C406.2.3.1 | preheat recovery                                 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |     |    |    |     |     |     |     |
|             |               |            | 12                                               | 13 | 16 | 15 | 18 | 20 | 1  | 21 | 26 | 17 | 21 | 21 | 16  | 1  | 21 | 13  | 16  | 15  | 13  |
| W02         | Heat pump     | C406.2.3.1 | 3                                                | 3  | 4  | 3  | 4  | 5  | 5  | 5  | 7  | 5  | 6  | 6  | 4   | 5  | 6  | 4   | 4   | 4   | 4   |
| W03         | Efficient gas | C406.2.3.1 | 6                                                | 7  | 8  | 8  | 10 | 10 | 10 | 11 | 14 | 11 | 11 | 8  | 10  | 11 | 7  | 8   | 8   | 7   |     |
| W04         | SHW pipe      | C406.2.3.2 | 3                                                | 3  | 4  | 4  | 4  | 4  | 4  | 4  | 5  | 4  | 4  | 5  | 4   | 4  | 4  | 4   | 4   | 4   |     |
| W05         | Point of use  | C406.2.3.3 | water heaters                                    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |     |    |    |     |     |     |     |
|             |               |            | x                                                | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x   | x  | x  | x   | x   |     |     |
| W06         | Thermostatic  | C406.2.3.3 | 1                                                | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1   | 1  | 1  | 1   | 1   | 1   |     |
| W07         | SHW heat      | C406.2.3.3 | 4                                                | 4  | 4  | 4  | 5  | 5  | 5  | 5  | 6  | 5  | 5  | 6  | 5   | 5  | 5  | 5   | 5   | 5   |     |

| W08 | SHW         | C406.2.3.4 | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  |    | x  | x | x  | x  | x  | x  |    | x  | x |    |    |   |
| --- | ----------- | ---------- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | - | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | - | -- | -- | - |
| W0  | SHW flow    | C406.2.3.5 | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  |    | x  | x | x  | x  | x  | x  |    | x  | x |    |    |   |
| W10 | Shower heat | C406.2.3.6 | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  |    | x  | x | x  | x  | x  | x  |    | x  | x |    |    |   |
| P01 | Energy      | C406.2.4   | 5  | 5  | 5  | 5  | 5  | 5  |    | 5  | 5 | 5  | 5  | 5  | 5  | 5  | 5  | 5 | 5  | 5  |   |
| L01 | Lighting    | C406.2.5.1 | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  |    | x  | x | x  | x  | x  | x  |    | x  | x |    |    |   |
| L02 | dimming     | C406.2.5.2 |    | 11 | 10 | 12 | 13 | 11 | 13 | 15 |   | 12 | 11 | 7  |    | 10 | 5  | 7 | 5  | 3  |   |
| L03 | Increase    | C406.2.5.3 |    | 11 | 10 | 12 | 13 | 12 | 13 | 15 |   | 10 | 12 | 11 | 7  | 10 | 11 | 6 | 8  | 5  | 4 |
| L04 | Increase    | C406.2.5.4 | 12 | 13 | 15 | 14 | 16 | 17 | 15 | 16 |   | 20 | 11 | 14 | 13 | 12 | 11 | 8 | 10 | 10 | 8 |
| L05 | Residential | C406.2.5.5 | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  |    | x  | x | x  | x  | x  | x  |    | x  | x |    |    |   |
| L06 | Light power | C406.2.5.7 | 12 | 12 | 14 | 14 | 15 | 16 | 12 | 15 |   | 1  | 8  | 12 | 6  | 10 | 7  | 6 | 7  | 6  | 5 |
| 01  | Efficient   | C406.2.7.1 | 3  | 3  | 4  | 3  | 4  | 4  |    | 4  | 4 | 5  | 3  | 4  | 4  | 3  | 4  | 3 | 3  | 2  |   |
| 02  | Commercial  | C406.2.7.2 | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  |    | x  | x | x  | x  | x  | x  |    | x  | x |    |    |   |
| 03  | Residential | C406.2.7.3 | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  |    | x  | x | x  | x  | x  | x  |    | x  | x |    |    |   |
| 04  | Fault       | C406.2.7.4 | 3  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  |    | 2  | 2 | 1  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 3  | 2  | 3 | 4  |    |   |

a. x indicates credit is not available for that measure.
| RGY CR IT OR GRO P OCC P CI | 0A 0 1A 1 2A 2 3A 3 3C 4A 4 4C 5A 5 5C 6A 6 7 8 |              |                                                  |     |           |            |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |    |    |    |    |     |
| --------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------- | ------------ | ------------------------------------------------ | --- | --------- | ---------- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | --- |
| E01                         | E02                                             | E03          | E04                                              | E05 | E06       | H01        | H02 | H03 | H04 | H05 | W01 | W02 | W03 | W04 | W05 | W06 |    |    |    |    |    |     |
| E01                         | Envelope                                        | C406.2.1.1   | Determined in accordance with Section C406.2.1.1 | E02 | reduction | C406.2.1.2 | 22  | 8   | 20  | 12  | 5   | 11  | 3   | 4   | 2   | 3   | 6  | 0  | 4  | 3  | 4  | 3   |
| E03                         | Envelope                                        | leak         | C406.2.1.3                                       | 4   | 3         | 3          | 3   | 2   | 5   | 2   | 1   | 1   | 1   | 1   | 1   | 1   | 2  | 1  | 1  | 1  |    |     |
| E04                         | Add Roof                                        | Insulation   | C406.2.1.4                                       | 8   | 8         | 4          | 5   | 7   | 16  | 7   | 1   | 14  | 7   | 10  | 18  | 13  | 13 | 23 | 25 | 22 | 28 |     |
| E05                         | Add Wall                                        | Insulation   | C406.2.1.5                                       | 5   | 7         | 4          | 8   | 3   | 6   | 8   | 6   | 2   | 6   | 3   | 6   | 5   | 5  | 6  | 7  | 6  | 7  | 8   |
| E06                         | Improve                                         | Fenestration | C406.2.1.6                                       | 8   | 10        | 6          | 11  | 11  | 15  | 1   | 16  | 8   | 15  | 22  | 18  | 1   | 33 | 1  | 18 |    |    |     |
| H01                         | HVAC                                            | C406.2.2.1   | 30                                               | 28  | 25        | 26         | 23  | 21  | 20  | 18  | 15  | 1   | 18  | 17  | 1   | 20  | 15 | 23 | 20 | 25 | 2  |     |
| H02                         | Heating                                         | efficiency   | C406.2.2.2                                       | x   | x         | x          | x   | x   | x   | 4   | 3   | 3   | 5   | 5   | 10  | 11  | 6  | 15 | 11 | 18 | 26 |     |
| H03                         | Cooling                                         | efficiency   | C406.2.2.3                                       | 8   | 6         | 7          | 5   | 4   | 2   | 2   | 1   | 1   | 1   | 1   | 1   | x   | x  | x  | x  |    |    |     |
| H04                         | HVAC                                            | control      | C406.2.2.4                                       | x   | x         | x          | x   | x   | x   | x   | x   | x   | x   | x   | x   | x   | x  | x  | x  |    |    |     |
| H05                         | DOAS/fan                                        | control      | C406.2.2.5                                       | 45  | 42        | 37         | 41  | 36  | 34  | 41  | 3   | 30  | 43  | 46  | 58  | 57  | 65 | 40 | 7  | 63 | 88 | 117 |
| W01                         | SHW                                             | preheat      | C406.2.3.1                                       | a   | 7         | 7          | 8   | 10  | 11  | 13  | 13  | 15  | 14  | 15  | 15  | 14  | 17 | 13 | 15 | 14 | 12 |     |
| W02                         | Heat pump                                       | water heater | C406.2.3.1                                       | 4   | 4         | 6          | 5   | 7   | 7   |     | 10  | 10  | 10  | 11  | 11  | 10  | 12 | 10 | 11 | 10 |    |     |
| W03                         | Efficient gas                                   | water heater | C406.2.3.1                                       | 4   | 4         | 6          | 5   | 6   | 7   | 8   | 8   |     | 10  |     | 11  | 8   | 10 |    | 7  |    |    |     |
| W04                         | SHW pipe                                        | insulation   | C406.2.3.2                                       | 3   | 3         | 4          | 4   | 4   | 4   | 4   | 5   | 6   | 5   | 5   | 6   | 5   | 5  | 7  | 4  | 5  | 4  | 4   |
| W05                         | Point of use                                    | water        | C406.2.3.3                                       | a   | 3         | 4          | 4   | 4   | 5   | 5   | 5   | 6   | 5   | 5   | 5   | 5   | 6  | 4  | 5  | 4  | 3  |     |
| W06                         | Thermostatic                                    | bal. valves  | C406.2.3.3                                       |     | 1         | 1          | 1   | 1   | 1   | 1   | 2   | 2   | 2   | 2   | 2   | 2   | 1  | 2  | 1  | 1  |    |     |

# W07

SHW heat

| C406.2.3.3 | 4 | 4 | 4 | 4 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 6 | 7 | 6 | 6 | 7 | 6 | 6 | 8 | 5 | 7 | 5 | 5 |
| ---------- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |

# W08

SHW

| C406.2.3.4 | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x |
| ---------- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |

# W0

SHW flow

| C406.2.3.5 | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x |
| ---------- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |

# W10

Shower heat recovery

| C406.2.3.6 | 2 | 2 | 2 | 2 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 4 | 3 | 3 | 4 | 3 | 3 | 4 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 |
| ---------- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |

# P01

Energy monitoring

| C406.2.4 | 4 | 4 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 4 |
| -------- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |

# L01

Lighting Performance

| C406.2.5.1 | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x |
| ---------- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |

# L02

Lighting dimming tuning

| C406.2.5.2 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 6 | 6 | 6 | 5 | 6 | 7 | 6 | 6 | 6 | 5 | 5 | 6 | 4 | 4 | 3 | 2 |
| ---------- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |

# L03

Increase occp. sensor

| C406.2.5.3 | 4 | 4 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 6 | 6 | 6 | 7 | 6 | 6 | 5 | 4 | 4 | 5 | 3 | 4 | 3 | 2 |
| ---------- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |

# L04

Increase daylight area

| C406.2.5.4 | 6 | 6 | 7 | 7 | 7 | 7 | 7 | 7 | 8 | 6 | 6 | 6 | 5 | 5 | 6 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 4 |
| ---------- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |

# L05

Residential light control

| C406.2.5.5 | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x |
| ---------- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |

# L06

Light power reduction

| C406.2.5.7 | 6 | 7 | 7 | 7 | 8 | 8 | 8 | 8 | 10 | 7 | 8 | 7 | 6 | 7 | 8 | 5 | 6 | 4 | 2 |
| ---------- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | -- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |

# 01

Efficient elevator

| C406.2.7.1 | 3 | 4 | 4 | 4 | 4 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 4 | 5 | 4 | 3 |
| ---------- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |

# 02

Commercial kitchen e uip.

| C406.2.7.2 | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x |
| ---------- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |

# 03

Residential kitchen e uip.

| C406.2.7.3 | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x |
| ---------- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |

# 04

Fault detection

| C406.2.7.4 | 4 | 4 | 4 | 4 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 2 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 2 | 4 | 3 | 4 | 4 |
| ---------- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |

a. x indicates measure is not available for that measure.
| RGY CR IT OR GRO P                              | OCC P CI                   |            |                                                  |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |     |    |    |     |     |    |     |     |     |     |   |
| ----------------------------------------------- | -------------------------- | ---------- | ------------------------------------------------ | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | --- | -- | -- | --- | --- | -- | --- | --- | --- | --- | - |
| 0A 0 1A 1 2A 2 3A 3 3C 4A 4 4C 5A 5 5C 6A 6 7 8 |                            |            |                                                  |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |     |    |    |     |     |    |     |     |     |     |   |
| E01                                             | Envelope                   | C406.2.1.1 | Determined in accordance with Section C406.2.1.1 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |     |    |    |     |     |    |     |     |     |     |   |
| E02                                             | Performance reduction      | C406.2.1.2 | 1                                                | 2  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 2  | 25 | 2  | 1  | 62  | 11 | 14 | 74  | 21  | 6  | 75  | 57  | 58  | 21  |   |
| E03                                             | Envelope leak reduction    | C406.2.1.3 | 2                                                | 2  | 1  | 2  | 1  | 3  | 31 | 3  | 1  | 77  | 14 | 17 | 2   | 25  | 8  | 5   | 71  | 6   | 26  |   |
| E04                                             | Add Roof Insulation        | C406.2.1.4 | 13                                               | 12 | 10 | 11 | 10 | 11 | 18 | 17 | 7  | 14  | 1  | 18 | 14  | 20  | 22 | 10  | 14  | 12  | 1   |   |
| E05                                             | Add Wall Insulation        | C406.2.1.5 | 1                                                | 23 | 13 | 21 | 7  | 10 | 15 | 12 | 3  | 10  | 12 | 13 |     | 12  | 12 | 7   |     | 8   |     |   |
| E06                                             | Improve Fenestration       | C406.2.1.6 | 7                                                | 5  | 8  | 7  | 6  | 6  | 2  | 4  | 2  | 4   | 1  | 6  |     | 5   | 1  | 7   | 3   | 4   | 4   | 7 |
| H01                                             | HVAC Performance           | C406.2.2.1 | x                                                |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |     |    |    |     |     |    |     |     |     |     |   |
| H02                                             | Heating efficiency         | C406.2.2.2 | x                                                | 16 | 3  | 1  | 33 | 17 | 22 | 41 | 31 | 21  | 44 | 38 | 43  | 43  |    |     |     |     |     |   |
| H03                                             | Cooling efficiency         | C406.2.2.3 | 7                                                | 7  | 4  | 5  | 3  | 3  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1   | 1  | 1  | 1   | x   | x  | x   | x   |     |     |   |
| H04                                             | Residential HVAC control   | C406.2.2.4 | x                                                |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |     |    |    |     |     |    |     |     |     |     |   |
| H05                                             | DOAS/fan control           | C406.2.2.5 | 35                                               | 37 | 26 | 33 | 24 | 27 | 77 | 35 | 14 | 141 | 83 | 6  | 168 | 132 | 0  | 180 | 157 | 177 | 178 |   |
| W01                                             | SHW preheat recovery       | C406.2.3.1 | a                                                | 8  | 7  |    | 8  | 10 | 10 | 8  | 10 | 12  | 5  | 8  | 8   | 4   | 6  | 3   | 4   | 3   | 3   |   |
| W02                                             | Heat pump water heater     | C406.2.3.1 | 2                                                | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 3  | 1   | 2  | 2  | 1   | 2   | 2  | 1   | 1   | 1   | 1   |   |
| W03                                             | Efficient gas water heater | C406.2.3.1 | 4                                                | 4  | 5  | 4  | 5  | 5  | 4  | 5  | 6  | 3   | 4  | 4  | 2   | 3   | 5  | 2   | 2   | 2   | 2   |   |
| W04                                             | SHW pipe insulation        | C406.2.3.2 | 3                                                | 3  | 4  | 3  | 3  | 3  | 2  | 3  | 4  | 2   | 2  | 3  | 1   | 2   | 3  | 1   | 1   | 1   | 1   |   |
| W05                                             | Point of use water heaters | C406.2.3.3 | a                                                | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x   | x  | x  | x   | x   | x  | x   | x   | x   |     |   |
| W06                                             | Thermostatic bal. valves   | C406.2.3.3 | 1                                                | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1   | 1  | 1  | 1   | 1   | 1  | 1   | 1   | 1   |     |   |
| W07                                             | SHW heat trace system      | C406.2.3.3 | 4                                                | 4  | 4  | 3  | 4  | 4  | 3  | 4  | 5  | 2   | 3  | 3  | 2   | 2   | 4  | 2   | 2   | 2   |     |   |
| W08                                             | SHW submeters              | C406.2.3.4 | x                                                |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |     |    |    |     |     |    |     |     |     |     |   |

# W0

| SHW flow                   | C406.2.3.5 | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x | x  | x  | x | x  | x  | x | x | x |   |
| -------------------------- | ---------- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | - | -- | -- | - | -- | -- | - | - | - | - |
| Shower heat                | C406.2.3.6 | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x | x  | x  | x | x  | x  | x | x | x |   |
| Energy                     | C406.2.4   | 5  | 5  | 6  | 6  | 6  | 6  | 5  | 6  | 6  | 5 | 5  | 5  | 5 | 5  | 6  | 5 | 5 | 5 |   |
| Lighting                   | C406.2.5.1 | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x | x  | x  | x | x  | x  | x | x | x |   |
| Lighting dimming           | C406.2.5.2 | 10 | 10 | 12 | 11 | 12 | 14 | 12 | 14 | 6  |   | 3  |    | 6 | 3  | 5  | 3 | 2 |   |   |
| Increase occp. sensor      | C406.2.5.3 | 12 | 12 | 14 | 13 | 15 | 14 | 12 | 14 | 17 | 7 | 11 | 11 | 5 | 7  | 11 | 4 | 6 | 3 | 3 |
| Increase daylight area     | C406.2.5.4 | 15 | 14 | 18 | 16 | 18 | 17 | 13 | 16 | 21 | 7 | 12 | 11 | 5 | 8  | 10 | 4 | 6 | 6 | 5 |
| Residential light control  | C406.2.5.5 | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x | x  | x  | x | x  | x  | x | x | x |   |
| Light power reduction      | C406.2.5.7 | 14 | 14 | 17 | 16 | 17 | 17 | 13 | 17 | 1  | 8 | 13 | 12 | 5 | 8  | 12 | 4 | 6 | 4 | 2 |
| Efficient elevator         | C406.2.7.1 | 15 | 14 | 18 | 16 | 18 | 18 | 15 | 18 | 21 |   | 14 | 14 | 7 | 10 | 14 | 5 | 7 | 5 | 5 |
| Commercial kitchen equip.  | C406.2.7.2 | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x | x  | x  | x | x  | x  | x | x |   |   |
| Residential kitchen equip. | C406.2.7.3 | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x | x  | x  | x | x  | x  | x | x |   |   |
| Fault detection            | C406.2.7.4 | 3  | 3  | 2  | 3  | 2  | 2  | 3  | 2  | 1  | 5 | 3  | 3  | 5 | 4  | 3  | 6 | 5 | 6 | 6 |

a. x indicates measure is not available for building occupancy in that climate zone.
| E01         | Envelope                   | C406.2.1.1 | Determined in accordance with Section C406.2.1.1 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
| ----------- | -------------------------- | ---------- | ------------------------------------------------ | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- |
| Performance | UA                         | 5          | 5                                                | 8  | 5  | 6  | 10 | 5  | 2  | 20 | 6  | 6  | 25 | 10 | 4  | 28 | 22 | 26 | 16 |    |    |    |    |
| E02         | reduction                  | C406.2.1.2 | 6                                                | 4  | 5  | 4  | 3  | 7  | 12 | 3  | 2  | 28 | 5  | 6  | 36 | 3  | 41 | 27 | 33 | 15 |    |    |    |
| E03         | leak                       | C406.2.1.3 | 4                                                | 4  | 3  | 4  | 4  | 4  | 8  | 6  | 2  | 7  | 6  | 7  | 8  | 10 | 12 |    |    |    |    |    |    |
| E04         | Add Roof Insulation        | C406.2.1.4 | 4                                                | 4  | 3  | 4  | 4  | 4  | 8  | 6  | 2  | 7  | 6  | 7  | 8  | 10 | 12 |    |    |    |    |    |    |
| E05         | Add Wall Insulation        | C406.2.1.5 | 16                                               | 1  | 11 | 17 | 5  | 6  | 10 | 7  | 2  | 6  | 8  | 7  | 7  | 10 | 8  |    |    |    |    |    |    |
| E06         | Improve Fenestration       | C406.2.1.6 | 4                                                | 4  | 3  | 4  | 5  | 6  | 6  | 4  | 1  | 4  | 7  | 11 | 7  | 6  | 16 | 14 | 8  | 8  |    |    |    |
| H01         | HVAC Performance           | C406.2.2.1 | x                                                |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
| H02         | Heating efficiency         | C406.2.2.2 | x                                                | 6  | 2  | 3  | 11 | 6  | 8  | 15 | 11 | 18 | 15 | 1  | 23 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
| H03         | Cooling efficiency         | C406.2.2.3 | 7                                                | 7  | 5  | 5  | 4  | 3  | 1  | 2  | 1  | x  |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
| H04         | HVAC control               | C406.2.2.4 | x                                                |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
| H05         | DOAS/fan control           | C406.2.2.5 | 7                                                |    | 36 | 31 | 34 | 30 | 28 | 43 | 32 | 23 | 61 | 42 |    | 4  | 75 | 61 | 4  | 0  | 77 | 3  | 0  |
| W01         | SHW preheat recovery       | C406.2.3.1 | a                                                | 18 | 1  | 22 | 21 | 25 | 26 | 28 | 2  | 34 | 2  | 31 | 35 | 26 | 2  | 27 | 26 |    |    |    |    |
| W02         | Heat pump water heater     | C406.2.3.1 |                                                  | 12 | 12 | 15 | 14 | 17 | 17 | 20 | 20 | 24 | 21 | 22 |    | 25 | 21 | 23 | 26 | 20 | 22 | 21 | 20 |
| W03         | Efficient gas water heater | C406.2.3.1 |                                                  | 11 | 11 | 13 | 13 | 15 | 16 | 17 | 17 | 21 | 18 | 1  |    | 21 | 18 | 1  | 22 | 16 | 18 | 17 | 16 |
| W04         | SHW pipe insulation        | C406.2.3.2 | 3                                                | 3  | 4  | 4  |    | 4  | 4  | 4  | 4  | 5  | 4  | 4  | 5  | 3  | 4  | 3  | 3  |    |    |    |    |
| W05         | Point of use water heaters | C406.2.3.3 | a                                                | 8  |    | 10 | 11 | 10 | 11 | 12 | 12 | 12 | 14 | 13 | 13 | 14 | 11 | 12 | 12 | 11 |    |    |    |
| W06         | Thermostatic bal. valves   | C406.2.3.3 | b                                                | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 2  | 1  | 1  | 2  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 1  |    |    |    |    |

# W07

SHW heat

| C406.2.3.3 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 6 | 6 | 6 | 6 | 7 | 6 | 6 | 7 | 5 | 6 | 7 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 5 |
| ---------- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |

# W08

SHW

| C406.2.3.4 | 11 | 11 | 13 | 13 | 15 | 16 | 18 | 18 | 22 | 1 | 20 | 22 | 1 | 20 | 24 | 17 | 20 | 18 | 18 |
| ---------- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | - | -- | -- | - | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- |

# W0

SHW flow

| C406.2.3.5 | 2 | 30 | 36 | 35 | 41 | 43 | 48 | 48 | 56 | 50 | 53 | 5 | 51 | 54 | 62 | 47 | 52 | 4 | 48 |
| ---------- | - | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | - | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | - | -- |

# W10

Shower heat

| C406.2.3.6 | 6 | 6 | 7 | 7 | 8 | 10 | 10 | 11 | 10 | 11 | 12 | 10 | 11 | 12 | 10 | 11 | 10 | 10 |
| ---------- | - | - | - | - | - | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- |

# P01

Energy

| C406.2.4 | 4 | 4 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 4 |
| -------- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |

# L01

Lighting

Performance

| C406.2.5.1 | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x |
| ---------- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |

# L02

dimming

| C406.2.5.2 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 6 | 6 | 5 | 6 | 7 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 4 | 4 | 5 | 3 | 4 | 3 | 2 |
| ---------- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |

# L03

Increase

occp. sensor

| C406.2.5.3 | 5 | 6 | 6 | 6 | 7 | 7 | 6 | 7 | 8 | 5 | 6 | 6 | 4 | 5 | 6 | 3 | 4 | 3 | 2 |
| ---------- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |

# L04

Increase

daylight area

| C406.2.5.4 | 7 | 8 | 8 |   | 8 | 8 | 10 | 6 | 7 | 7 | 5 | 6 | 6 | 4 | 5 | 5 | 4 |
| ---------- | - | - | - | - | - | - | -- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |

# L05

Residential

light control

| C406.2.5.5 | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x |
| ---------- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |

# L06

Light power

reduction

| C406.2.5.7 | 7 | 7 | 8 | 7 | 8 | 8 | 7 | 8 |   | 5 | 7 | 6 | 4 | 5 | 6 | 4 | 4 | 3 | 2 |
| ---------- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |

# 01

Efficient

elevator

| C406.2.7.1 | 4 | 4 | 5 | 4 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 6 | 4 | 5 | 5 | 4 | 4 | 5 | 3 | 4 | 3 | 3 |
| ---------- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |

# 02

Commercial

kitchen

e uip.

| C406.2.7.2 | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x |
| ---------- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |

# 03

Residential

kitchen

e uip.

| C406.2.7.3 | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x | x |
| ---------- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |

# 04

Fault

detection

| C406.2.7.4 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 2 | 3 | 2 | 2 | 3 | 3 | 2 | 3 | 3 | 2 | 4 | 3 | 4 | 4 |
| ---------- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |

a. x indicates measure is not available for that measure.

b. Other occupancy groups include all Groups except for Groups A-2, E, I, and R.

C

A project shall achieve credits for improved envelope performance by complying with one of the following measures:

1. Section C406.2.1.1: E01
2. Section C406.2.1.2: E02
3. Section C406.2.1.3: E03
4. Both E02 and E03
5. Any combination of:
# 5.3. Section C406.2.1.5: E05

# 5.4. Section C406.2.1.6: E06

C O I C

C O I C ilding envelope measures shall be installed to improve the energy performance of the project. The achieved energy credits shall be determined using Equation 4-15.

ECENV E01 measure energy credits

EPF base envelope performance factor calculated in accordance with ASHRAE 90.1-2010 -Appendix C.

EPFP proposed envelope performance factor calculated in accordance with ASHRAE 90.1-2010 -Appendix C.

C T

C T Energy credits shall be achieved where the total UA of the building thermal envelope as designed is not less than 15 percent below the total UA of the building thermal envelope in accordance with Section C402.1.5.

C R

C R Energy credits shall be achieved where tested building air leakage is not less than 10 percent less than the maximum leakage permitted by Section C402.5.2 provided the building is tested in accordance with the applicable method in Section C402.5.2. Energy credits achieved for measure E03 shall be determined as follows:

ECE03 Energy efficiency credits achieved for envelope leakage reduction

EC C406.2.1.3 credits from Tables C406.2(1) through C406.2( )

ECad Ls/ECₐ

Ls Leakage savings fraction: the lesser of (Lr-Lm)/Lr or 0.8

Lr maximum leakage permitted for tested buildings, by occupancy group, in accordance with Section C402.5.2

Lm measured leakage in accordance with Section C402.5.2.1 or C402.5.2.2

ECₐ Energy Credit alignment factor: 0.37 for whole building tests in accordance with Section C402.5.2.1 or 0.25 for dwelling and sleeping unit enclosure tests in accordance with Section C402.5.2.2

C R I

C R I Energy credits shall be achieved for insulation that is in addition to the required insulation in Table C402.1.3. All roof areas in the project shall have
Additional R-10 continuous insulation included in the roof assembly. For attics this is permitted to be achieved with fill or batt insulation rated at R-10 that is continuous and not interrupted by ceiling or roof joists. Where interrupted by joists, the added insulation shall be not less than R-13. Alternatively, one-half of the base credits shall be achieved where the added R-value is one-half of the additional R-value required by this section.

# C

Energy credits shall be achieved for insulation applied to not less than 0 percent of all opaque wall area in the project that is in addition to the required insulation in Table C402.1.3. Opaque walls shall have additional R-5 continuous insulation included in the wall assembly. Alternatively, one-half of the base credits shall be achieved where the added R-value is R-2.5.

# C

# I

Energy credits for one selected fenestration energy credit ID shall be achieved for improved energy characteristics of all vertical fenestration in the project meeting the requirements in one of the rows of Table C406.2.1.6. The area-weighted average U-factor and SHGC of all vertical fenestration shall be equal to or less than the value shown in the selected table row. The area-weighted average visible transmittance (VT) of all vertical fenestration shall be equal to or greater than the value shown in the selected table row.
# Applicable Climate

|       | one      | Maximum U-Factor | Maximum SHGC | Minimum VT |      |      |
| ----- | -------- | ---------------- | ------------ | ---------- | ---- | ---- |
| Fixed | Operable | 0-2              | 0.45         | 0.52       | 0.21 | 0.28 |
| 3     | 0.33     | 0.44             | 0.23         | 0.30       |      |      |
| 4-5   | 0.31     | 0.38             | 0.34         | 0.41       |      |      |
| 6-7   | 0.26     | 0.32             | 0.38         | 0.44       |      |      |
| 8     | 0.24     | 0.28             | 0.38         | 0.44       |      |      |

All heating and cooling systems shall meet the minimum requirements of Section C403 and efficiency improvements shall be referenced to minimum efficiencies listed in Tables referenced by Section C403.3.2. Where multiple efficiency requirements are listed, equipment shall meet the seasonal or part-load efficiencies including SEER, EER/integrated energy efficiency ratio (IEER), integrated part load value (IPLV), or AFUE. Equipment that is larger than the maximum capacity range indicated in Tables referenced by Section C403.3.2 shall utilize the values listed for the largest capacity equipment for the associated equipment type shown in the table. Where multiple individual heating or cooling systems serve the project, the improvement shall be the weighted average improvement based on individual system capacity. Systems are permitted to achieve HVAC energy credits by meeting the requirements of either:

1. C406.2.2.1 H01
2. C406.2.2.2 H02
3. C406.2.2.3 H03
4. C406.2.2.4 H04
5. C406.2.2.5 H05
6. Any combination of H02, H03, H04 and H05
7. The combination of H01 and H04

H01 energy credits shall be achieved for systems allowed to use Section C403.1.3, HVAC total system performance ratio, where the proposed TSPR exceeds the minimum TSPR requirement by 5 percent. If improvement is greater, base energy credits from Table C406.2(1) through C406.2( ) are permitted to be prorated up to a 20 percent improvement using Equation 4-17. Energy credits for H01 may not be combined with energy credits from HVAC measures H02, H03 and H05.
TSPRs the lessor of 0.20 and (1-(TSPRp/TSPRt)) where:

- TSPRt TSPRr / PF
- TSPRp HVAC TSPR of the proposed design calculated in accordance with Sections C40.4, C40.5 and C40.6.
- TSPRr HVAC TSPR of the reference building design calculated in accordance with Sections C40.4, C40.5 and C40.6.
- PF Mechanical Performance Factor from Table C40.4 based on climate zone and building use type

Where a building has multiple building use types, PF shall be area weighted in accordance with Section C40.4.

No less than 0 percent of the total HVAC capacity serving the total conditioned floor area of the entire building, or tenant space in accordance with Section C406.1.1, shall comply with the requirements of this Section.

1. Equipment installed shall be types that are listed in Tables referenced by Section C403.3.2. Electric resistance heating capacity shall be limited to 20 percent of system capacity, with the exception of heat pump supplemental heating.
2. Equipment shall exceed the minimum heating efficiency requirements listed in Tables referenced by Section C403.3.2 by at least 5 percent. Where equipment exceeds the minimum annual heating efficiency requirements by more than 5 percent, energy efficiency credits for heating shall be determined using Equation 4-18 rounded to the nearest whole number.

EECHEH energy efficiency credits for heating efficiency improvement

EECH5 C406.2.2.2 credits from Tables C406.2(1) through C406.2( )

HEI the lesser of: the improvement (as a fraction) above minimum heating efficiency requirements, or 20 percent (0.20). Where heating equipment with different minimum efficiencies are included in the building, a heating capacity weighted average improvement shall be used. Where electric resistance primary heating or reheat is included in the building it shall be included in the weighted average improvement with an HEI of 0. Supplemental gas and electric heat for heat pump systems shall be excluded from the weighted HEI. For heat pumps rated at multiple ambient temperatures, the efficiency at 47 F (8.3 C) shall be used.

For metrics that increase as efficiency increases, HEI shall be calculated as follows:

HEI (H_DES/H_MIN)-1

Where:

- H_DES Design heating efficiency metric, part-load or annualized where available
- H_MIN Minimum required heating efficiency metric, part-load or annualized where available from Section C403.3.2

In low energy spaces complying with Section C402.1.1, no less than 0 percent of the installed heating capacity is provided by electric infrared or gas-fired.
Radiant heating equipment for localized heating applications. Such spaces shall only achieve energy credits for EEC.

No less than 0 percent of the total HVAC cooling capacity serving the total conditioned floor area of the entire building or tenant space in accordance with Section C406.1.1, shall comply with all of the requirements of this section.

1. Equipment installed shall be types that are listed in Tables referenced by Section C403.3.2.
2. Equipment shall exceed the minimum cooling efficiency requirements listed in Tables referenced by Section C403.3.2 by at least 5 percent. For water-cooled chiller plants, heat reflection equipment efficiency shall also be increased by at least the chiller efficiency improvement. Where equipment exceeds the minimum annual cooling efficiency and heat reflection efficiency requirements by more than 5 percent, energy efficiency credits for cooling shall be determined using Equation 4-1, rounded to the nearest whole number.

Where fan energy is not included in packaged equipment rating or it is and the fan size has been increased from the as-rated equipment condition, fan power or horsepower shall be less than 5 percent of the allowed fan power in Section C403.8.1.

EECHEC energy efficiency credits for cooling efficiency improvement

EEC₅ the lesser of: the improvement above minimum cooling and heat reflection efficiency requirements expressed as a fraction, or 0.20 (20 percent). Where cooling equipment with different minimum efficiencies are included in the building, a cooling capacity weighted average improvement shall be used. Where multiple cooling performance requirements are provided, the equipment shall exceed the annualized energy or part-load requirement. Meeting both part-load and full-load efficiencies is not required.

For metrics that increase as efficiency increases, CEI shall be calculated as follows:

CEI = (CDES/CIN) - 1

For metrics that decrease as efficiency increases, CEI shall be calculated as follows:

CEI = (CIN/CDES) - 1

Where:

- CDES Design cooling efficiency metric, part-load or annualized where available
- CIN Minimum required cooling efficiency metric, part-load or annualized where available from Section C403.3.2

For Data Centers using ASHRAE Standard 90.4, CEI shall be calculated as follows:

CEI = (ALC/ALCDES) - 1

Where:

- ALCDES As-Designed Annualized Mechanical Load Component calculated in
# accordance with ASHRAE Standard 0.4, Section 6.5

# A LC A aximum Annuali ed echanical Load Component from ASHRAE Standard 0.4, Table 6.5

HVAC systems serving dwelling units or sleeping units shall be controlled to automatically activate a setback at least 5°F (3°C) for both heating and cooling. The temperature controller shall be configured to provide setback during occupied sleep periods. The unoccupied setback mode shall be configured to operate in conjunction with one of the following:

1. A manual main control device by each dwelling unit main entrance that initiates setback and non-ventilation mode for all HVAC units in the dwelling unit and is clearly identified as “Heating/Cooling Master Setback.”
2. Occupancy sensors in each room of the dwelling unit combined with a door switch to initiate setback and non-ventilation mode for all HVAC units in the dwelling within 20 minutes of all spaces being vacant immediately after a door switch operation. Where separate room HVAC units are used, an individual occupancy sensor on each unit that is configured to provide setback shall meet this requirement.
3. An advanced learning thermostat or controller that recognizes occupant presence and automatically creates a schedule for occupancy and provides a dynamic setback schedule based on when the spaces are generally unoccupied.
4. An automated control and sensing system that uses geographic fencing connected to the dwelling unit occupants' cell phones and initiates the setback condition when all occupants are away from the building.

# Credits for this measure are only allowed where single one HVAC units are not required to have multi-speed or variable-speed fan control in accordance with Section C403.8.6.1.

HVAC controls and ventilation systems shall include all of the following:

1. One controls shall cycle the heating/cooling unit fans off when not providing required heating and cooling or shall limit fan power to 0.12 watts/cfm of one outdoor air.
2. Outdoor air shall be supplied by an independent ventilation system designed to provide no more than 110 percent of the minimum outdoor air to each individual occupied one, as specified by the International Mechanical Code.
3. The ventilation system shall have energy recovery with an enthalpy recovery ratio of 65 percent or more at heating design conditions in climate zones 3 through 8 and an enthalpy recovery ratio of 65 percent or more at cooling design conditions in climate zones 0, 1, 2, 3A, 3B, 4A, 4B, 5A, and 6A. In “A” climate zones, energy recovery shall include latent recovery. Where no humidification is provided, heating energy recovery effectiveness is permitted to be based on sensible energy recovery ratio. Where energy recovery effectiveness is less than the 65 percent required for full credit, adjust the credits from Section C406.2 by the factors in Table C406.2.2.5.
4. Where the ventilation system serves multiple zones and the system is not in a latent recovery outside air dehumidification mode, partial economizer cooling through an...
# 4. Energy Recovery and Controls

Outdoor air bypass or wheel speed control shall automatically do one of the following:

1. Set the energy recovery leaving-air temperature 55 F (13 C) or 100 percent outdoor air bypass when a majority of zones require cooling and outdoor air temperature is below 70 F (21 C).
2. The HVAC ventilation system shall include supply-air temperature controls that automatically reset the supply-air temperature in response to representative building loads, or to outdoor air temperatures. The controls shall reset the supply-air temperature not less than 25 percent of the difference between the design supply-air temperature and the design room-air temperature.

# 5. Mechanical Dehumidification

Ventilation systems providing mechanical dehumidification shall use recovered energy for reheat within the limits of item 4. This shall not limit the use of latent energy recovery for dehumidification.

Where only a portion of the building is permitted to be served by constant air volume units or the enthalpy recovery ratio or sensible energy recovery ratio is less than 65 percent, the base energy credits shown in Section C406.2 shall be prorated as follows:

| ECDOAS   | Energy credits achieved for H06                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
| -------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| ECbase   | H06 base energy credits in Section C406.2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
| FLOORCAV | Fraction of whole project gross conditioned floor area not required to have variable speed or multi-speed fan airflow control in accordance with Section C403.8.6.                                                                                                        |
| EREad    | The energy recovery adjustment from Table C406.2.2.5 based on the lower of actual cooling or heating enthalpy recovery ratio or sensible energy recovery ratio where required for the climate zone. Where recovery ratios vary, use a weighted average by supply airflow. |

# Energy Recovery Effectiveness

| Cooling | Heating | Enthalpy Recovery Ratio or Sensible Energy Recovery Ratio | Energy Recovery Effectiveness (EREad) |
| ------- | ------- | --------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------- |
| 65      | 65      | 1.00                                                      |                                       |
| 60      | 60      | 0.67                                                      |                                       |
| 55      | 55      | 0.33                                                      |                                       |
| 50      | 50      | 0.25                                                      |                                       |

a. In climate zones where heating recovery is required for this measure, for dwelling units a heating recovery effectiveness below 60 percent is not allowed.

# Credits for Service Water-Heating Equipment

Projects with service water-heating equipment that serves the whole building, a building addition or a tenant space shall achieve credits through compliance with the requirements of this section. Systems are permitted to achieve energy credits by meeting the requirements of either:

1. C406.2.3.1 by selecting one allowed measure W01, W02 or W03
2. C406.2.3.2 W04
3. C406.2.3.3 by selecting one allowed measure W05, W06, or W07
4. C406.2.3.4 W08
5. C406.2.3.5 W09
6. C406.2.3.6 W10
7. Any combination of measures in C402.2.3.1 through C402.2.3.6 as long as no more than one allowed measure from C406.2.3.1 and C406.2.3.3 are selected.

A project is allowed to achieve energy credits from only one of Sections C406.2.3.1.1 through C406.2.3.1.4.

# Building Service Water-Heating System Requirements

The building service water-heating system shall have one or more of the following that are sized to provide not less than 30 percent of the building's annual hot water requirements, or sized to provide not less than 70 percent of the building's annual hot water requirements if the building is required to comply with Section C403.10.5:

1. Waste heat recovery from SHW, heat recovery chillers, building equipment, or process equipment.
# 2. A water-to-water heat pump that precools chilled water return for building cooling.

# 3. On-site renewable energy water-heating systems.

# Air-source heat pump water heaters

Air-source heat pump water heaters shall be installed according to manufacturer’s instructions and at least 30 percent of design end use service water heating requirements shall be met using only heat pump heating at an ambient condition of 67.5 °F, db without supplemental electric resistance or fossil fuel heating. For a heat pump water heater with supplemental electric resistance heating, the heat pump only capacity shall be deemed at 40 percent of first hour draw. Where the heat pump only capacity exceeds 50 percent of the design end use load excluding recirculating system losses, the credits from the Section C406.2 tables shall be prorated as follows:

| ECHPWH  | Energy credits achieved for W02                                                                                                                                              |
| ------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| EC ASE  | W02 base energy credits Section 13.5.3                                                                                                                                       |
| ENDLOAD | End use peak hot water load, excluding load for heat trace or recirculation, tu/hr or kW                                                                                     |
| CAPHPWH | the heat pump only capacity at 50 °F (10 °C) entering air and 70 °F (21 °C) entering potable water without supplemental electric resistance or fossil fuel heat, tu/hr or kW |

The heat pump service water heating system shall comply with the following requirements:

1. For systems with an installed total output capacity of more than 100,000 tu/hr (30 kW) at an ambient condition of 67.5 °F (19.7 °C), db a preheat storage tank with greater than or equal 0.75 gallons per 1000 tu/hr (0.7 L/kW) of design end use service water heating requirements shall be heated only with heat pump heating when the ambient temperature is greater than 45 °F (7.2 °C).
2. For systems with piping temperature maintenance, either a heat trace system or a separate water heater in series for recirculating system and final heating shall be installed.
3. Heat pump water heater efficiency shall meet or exceed one of the following:
1. Output-capacity-weighted-average UEF of 3.0 in accordance with 10 CFR 430 Appendix E.
2. Output-capacity-weighted-average COP of not less than 4.0 tested at 50 °F (10 °C) entering air and 70 °F (21 °C) entering potable water in accordance with AHRI standard 1300.

Where the heat pump capacity at 50 °F (10 °C) entering air and 70 °F (21 °C) entering water exceeds 50 percent of the design end-use load excluding recirculating system losses, the base credits from Section C406.2 shall be prorated based on Equation 4-20.
# HPLF

Heat pump capacity as a fraction of the design end-use SHW requirements excluding recirculating system losses, not to exceed 80 percent.

The combined input-capacity-weighted-average equipment rating of all gas water-heating equipment in the building shall be not less than 5 percent Et or 0.3 UEF. This measure shall receive only thirty percent of the listed energy credits for buildings required to comply with C404.2.1. Projects where the installed building service water heating capacity is less than 200,000 tu/hr (5 kW) and weighted UEF is not less than 0.82 shall achieve 25 percent of the base table W03 credit.

Shall achieve credits using one of the measure combinations as follows:

1. (W01 + W02) Where service water heating employs both energy recovery and heat pump water heating, W01 may be combined with W02 and receive the sum of both credits.
2. (W01 + W03) Where service water heating employs both energy recovery and efficient gas water heating, W01 may be combined with W03 and receive the sum of the W01 credit and the portion of the W03 credit based on item 4.
3. (W02 + W03) Where service water heating employs both heat pump water heating and efficient gas water heating, W02 may be combined with W03 and receive the sum of the W02 credit and the portion of the W03 credit based on item 4.

For items 2 and 3, the achieved W03 credit shall be the Section C406.2.3.1.3 W03 credit multiplied by the fractional share of total water heating installed capacity served by gas water heating that is not less than 5 percent Et or 0.3 UEF. In no case shall the achieved W03 credit exceed 60 percent of the W03 credit in Section C406.2 tables. In buildings that have a service water heating design generating capacity greater than 200,000 tu/h that proportioned W03 credit shall be further multiplied by 30 percent.

A project is allowed to claim energy credits from only one of the following SHW distribution temperature maintenance measures.

1. H P I I I Where service hot water is provided by a central water heating system, the hot water pipe insulation thickness shall be at least 1.5 times the thickness required in Section C404.4. All service hot water piping shall be insulated from the hot water source to the fixture shutoff. Where no more than 50 percent of hot water piping does not have increased insulation due to installation in partitions, the credit shall be prorated as a percentage of lineal feet of piping with increased insulation.
# 2.

Credits are available for office or school buildings larger than 10,000 ft² (30 m²). Fixtures requiring hot water shall be supplied from a localized source of hot water with no recirculating system or heat trace piping. Supply piping from the water heater to the termination of the fixture supply pipe shall be insulated to the levels shown in Table C403.12.3 without exception. The volume from the water heater to the termination of the fixture supply pipe shall be limited as follows:

# 2.1.

Non-residential lavatories: not more than 2 oz (60 mL)

# 2.2.

All other plumbing fixtures or appliances: not more than 0.25 gallons (0.5 L)

Where all remotely located hot water uses meet the requirements for measure W05, separate water heaters serving commercial kitchens or showers in locker rooms shall be permitted to have a local recirculating system or heat trace piping.

# 3.

Credits are available where service water heating is provided centrally and distributed throughout the building. Each recirculating system branch return connection to the main SHW supply piping shall have an automatic thermostatic balancing valve set to a minimal return water flow when the branch return temperature is greater than 115 F (46 C).

# 4.

Credits are available for projects with gross floor area greater than 10,000 square feet (30 m²) and a central water-heating system. The energy credits achieved shall be from Tables C406.1.2(1) through C406.1.2(). This system shall include self-regulating electric heat cables, connection kits, and electronic controls. The cable shall be installed directly on the hot water supply pipes underneath the insulation to replace standby losses.

Each individual dwelling unit in a Group R-2 occupancy served by a central service water-heating system shall be provided with a service hot water meter connected to a reporting system that provides individual dwelling unit reporting of actual domestic hot water use. Preheated water serving the cold water inlet to showers need not be metered.

Dwelling unit, sleeping unit, and guest room plumbing fixtures that are connected to the service water-heating system shall have a flow or consumption rating less than or equal to the values shown in Table C406.2.3.5.
# Plumbing Fixture

| Fixture                                               | Maximum Flow Rate                        |
| ----------------------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------- |
| Faucet for private lavatory, hand sinks, or bar sinks | 1.50 gpm at 60 psi (0.05 L/s at 410 kPa) |
| Faucet for residential kitchen sink                   | 1.8 gpm at 60 psi (0.11 L/s at 410 kPa)  |
| Shower head (including hand-held shower spray)        | 2.0 gpm at 80 psi (0.13 L/s at 550 kPa)  |

a. Showerheads, lavatory faucets and kitchen faucets are subject to U.S. Federal requirements listed in 10 CFR 430.32(o)-(p).

b. Maximum flow allowed is less than required by flow rates listed in U.S. 10 CFR 430.32(o)-(p) for showerheads and kitchen faucets.

c. Residential kitchen faucet may temporarily increase the flow above the maximum rate, but not above 2.2 gallons per minute at 60 psi (0.14 L/s at 410 kPa) and must default to the maximum flow rate listed.

d. When a shower is served by multiple shower heads, the combined flow rate of all shower heads controlled by a single valve shall not exceed the maximum flow rate listed or the shower shall be designed to allow only one shower head to operate at a time.

# Cold Water Serving Building Showers

Cold water serving building showers shall be preheated by shower drain heat recovery units that comply with Section C404.7. The efficiency of drain heat recovery units shall be 54 percent or greater measured in accordance with CSA 55.1. Full credits are applicable to the following building uses: I-2, I-4, R-1, R-2 and also group E where there are more than eight showers. Partial credits are applicable to buildings where all but ground floor showers are served where the base energy credit from Section C406.2 is adjusted by Evaluation 4-23.
# Faucet and Shower Head Flow Rates

| Faucet for private lavatoryᵃ, hand sinks, or bar sinks | 1.50 gpm at 60 psi (0.05 L/s at 410 kPa) |
| ------------------------------------------------------ | ---------------------------------------- |
| Faucet for residential kitchen sinka, b, c             | 1.8 gpm at 60 psi (0.11 L/s at 410 kPa)  |
| Shower head (including hand-held shower spray)a, b, d  | 2.0 gpm at 80 psi (0.13 L/s at 550 kPa)  |

a. Showerheads, lavatory faucets and kitchen faucets are subject to U.S. Federal requirements listed in 10 CFR 430.32(o)-(p).

b. Maximum flow allowed is less than required by flow rates listed in U.S. 10 CFR 430.32(o)-(p) for showerheads and kitchen faucets.

c. Residential kitchen faucet may temporarily increase the flow above the maximum rate, but not above 2.2 gallons per minute at 60 psi (0.14 L/s at 410kPa) and must default to the maximum flow rate listed.

d. When a shower is served by multiple shower heads, the combined flow rate of all shower heads controlled by a single valve shall not exceed the maximum flow rate listed or the shower shall be designed to allow only one shower head to operate at a time.

# Energy Credits for Projects

A project not required to comply with C405.12 can achieve energy credits for installing an energy monitoring system that complies with all the requirements of C405.12.1 through C405.12.5.

Projects are permitted to achieve energy credits for increased lighting system performance by meeting the requirements of either:

1. C406.2.5.2 L02
2. C406.2.5.3 L03
3. C406.2.5.4 L04
4. C406.2.5.5 L05
5. C406.2.5.6 L06
6. Any combination of L03, L04, L05 and L06
7. Any combination of L02, L03 and L04

Where lighting energy credit measures include reductions in lighting power, the lighting shall achieve ANSI/IES recommended practice for minimum illuminance levels as referenced at “The Interactive Illuminance Selector,” which includes minimum recommended illuminance levels from various ANSI/IESRP standards.

# Reserved for Future Use
Measure credits shall be achieved where no less than 50 percent of the gross floor area within the project shall comply with the requirements of this section.

# 1. Lighting controls function

Interior general lighting shall be located, scheduled and operated in accordance with Section C405.2 and shall be configured with the following enhanced control functions:

# 1.1

Luminaires shall be configured for continuous dimming.

# 1.2

Each luminaire shall be individually addressed.

- Multiple luminaires mounted on no more than 12 linear feet (3.66 m) of a single lighting track and addressed as a single luminaire.
- Multiple linear luminaires that are ganged together to create the appearance of a single longer fixture and addressed as a single luminaire, where the total length of the combined luminaires is not more than 12 feet (3.66 m).

# 1.3

No more than eight luminaires within a daylight zone are permitted to be controlled by a single daylight responsive control.

# 2. Control system capabilities

Luminaires shall be controlled by a digital control system configured with the following capabilities:

# 2.1

Scheduling and illumination levels of individual luminaires and groups of luminaires are capable of being reconfigured through the system.

# 2.2

Load shedding.

# 2.3

Occupancy sensors and daylight responsive controls are capable of being reconfigured through the system.

# 3. Construction documents

Construction documents shall include submittal of a Sequence of Operations, including a specification outlining each of the functions required by this section.

# 4. High-end trim

Luminaires shall be initially configured with the following:

# 4.1

High-end trim, setting the maximum light output of individual luminaires or groups of luminaires to support visual needs of a space or area, shall be implemented and construction documents shall state that maximum light output or power of controlled lighting shall be initially reduced by at least 15 percent from full output. The average maximum light output or power of the controlled lighting shall be documented without high-end trim and with high-end trim to verify reduction of light output or power by at least 15 percent when tuned.

# 4.2

Where lumen maintenance control is used, controls shall be configured to limit the initial maximum lumen output or maximum lighting power to 85 percent or less of full light output or full power draw and lumen maintenance controls shall be limited to increasing lighting power by 1 percent per year.

# 4.3

High-end trim and lumen maintenance controls shall be accessible only to authorized personnel.

Where general lighting in more than 50 percent of the gross lighted floor area receives high-end trim, the base credits from Tables C406.1.2(1) through C406.1.2( ) shall be prorated as follows:

| Net lighted floor area | Base energy credits for C |
| ---------------------- | ------------------------- |
|                        |                           |

# Lighting Controls

Lighting controls shall comply with C406.2.5.3.1, C406.2.5.3.2 and C406.2.5.3.3.

# Occupant Sensor Controls

Occupant sensor controls shall be installed to control lights in the following space types:

1. Courtroom
2. Electrical/mechanical room
3. Food preparation area
4. Laboratory
5. Elevator lobby
6. Pharmacy area
7. Vehicular maintenance area
8. Workshop
9. Chapel in a facility for the visually impaired
10. Recreation room in a facility for the visually impaired
11. Exercise area in a fitness center
12. Playing area in a fitness center
13. Exam/treatment room in a healthcare facility
14. Imaging room in a healthcare facility
15. Physical therapy room in a healthcare facility
16. Library reading area
17. Library stacks
18. Detailed manufacturing area
19. Equipment room in a manufacturing facility
20. Low-bay area in a manufacturing facility
21. Post office sorting area
22. Religious fellowship hall
23. Religious worship/pulpit/choir area
24. Hair salon
25. Nail salon
26. Banking activity area
27. Computer room, data center
28. Laundry/washing area
29. Medical supply room in a healthcare facility
30. Telemedicine room in a healthcare facility
31. Museum restoration room

Occupant sensor controls shall automatically turn lights off within 10 minutes after all occupants have left the space. A manual control complying with C405.2.6 shall allow occupants to turn off lights. Time-switch controls are not required.
In spaces where an automatic shutoff could endanger occupant safety or security, occupant sensor controls shall uniformly reduce lighting power to not more than 20 percent of full power within 10 minutes after all occupants have left the space. Time-switch controls complying with C405.2.2.1 shall automatically turn lights off.

Occupant sensor controls installed in accordance with Sections C405.2.1.1, C405.2.1.2, C405.2.1.3, and C405.2.1.4 shall automatically turn lights off or reduce lighting power within 10 minutes after all occupants have left the space. Where lighting power is reduced, the unoccupied setpoint shall be 20 percent of full power or in egress areas to the power level required to meet egress light levels.

The total daylight area of the project (DLA LDG) with continuous daylight dimming meeting the requirements of C405.2.4 shall be at least 5 percent greater than the typical daylit area (DLATYP). Credits for measure L04 shall be determined based on Equation 4-24:

ECDL = The lesser of actual area of daylight zones in the building with continuous daylight dimming, ft² or m² and (GLFA x DLAₘₐₓ) see Table C406.2.5.4.

Daylight zones shall meet the criteria in Sections C405.2.4.2 and C405.2.4.3 for primary sidelit daylight zones, secondary sidelit daylight zones, and toplit daylight zones.

GLFA = Project gross lighted floor area, ft² or m²

DLATYP = Typical of building area with daylight control (as a fraction) from Table C406.2.5.4:

ECDL5 = C406.2.5.4 L04 base energy credits from Section C406.2
# Lighting Requirements

# Building Use Type

| Group                   | Office                                            | 5000 ft² (460 m²) | 10 | 20 |
| ----------------------- | ------------------------------------------------- | ----------------- | -- | -- |
| Group                   | Office                                            | 5000 ft² (460 m²) | 21 | 31 |
| Group                   | Retail with roof area                             | 1000 ft² (100 m²) | 0  | 20 |
| Group                   | Retail with roof area                             | 1000 ft² (100 m²) | 60 | 80 |
| Group E                 | Education                                         |                   | 42 | 52 |
| Groups S-1 and S-2      | Warehouse                                         |                   | 50 | 70 |
| Group I-2, R, and other | Medical, hotel, multifamily, dormitory, and other | NA                | NA |    |

# Interior Lighting Requirements

In buildings with Group R-2 occupancy spaces, interior lighting systems shall comply with the following:

1. Common area restrooms, laundry rooms, storage rooms, and utility rooms shall have automatic full OFF occupancy sensor controls that comply with the requirements of C405.2.1.1. Each additional control device shall control no more than 5,000 sq. ft (464 m²).
2. Each dwelling unit shall have a main control by the main entrance that turns off all the lights and all switched receptacles in the dwelling unit. Two switched receptacles shall be provided in living and sleeping rooms or areas and clearly identified. All switched receptacles shall be located within 12 inches (30 cm) of an unswitched receptacle. The main control shall be permitted to have two controls, one for permanently wired lighting and one for switched receptacles. The main controls should be clearly identified as “lights master off” and “switched outlets master off.”

Interior lighting within the whole building shall comply with all the requirements of this section. The net connected interior lighting power (LPn) shall be 5 percent or less than the net interior lighting power allowance (LPAn) determined in accordance with Section C405.3.2.2. In R-1 and R-2 occupancies the credit is calculated for all common areas other than dwelling units and sleeping units. No less than 5 percent of the permanently installed light fixtures in dwelling units and sleeping units, excluding kitchen appliance lighting, shall be provided by high efficacy lamps with a minimum efficacy of 0 lumens per watt or high efficacy luminaires that have a minimum efficacy of 55 lumens per watt. Energy credits shall not be greater than four times the L06 base credit from Section C406.2 and shall be determined using Evaluation 4-25:
# ECLPA additional energy credit for lighting power reduction

LPₙ net connected interior lighting power calculated in accordance with Section C405.3.1, watts, excluding any additional lighting power allowed in Section C405.3.2.2.1

LPAₙ interior lighting power allowance calculated in accordance with the requirements of Section C405.3.2.2, watts, less any additional interior lighting power allowed in Section C405.3.2.2.1

EC5 L06 base credit from Section C406.2

Projects are permitted to achieve energy credits using any combination of Efficient Equipment Credits 01 through 04.

Qualifying elevators in the building shall be Energy efficiency class A per ISO 25745-2, Table 7. Only buildings 3 or more floors above grade may use this credit. Credits shall be prorated based on Equation 4-26, rounded to the nearest whole credit. Projects with a compliance ratio below 0.5 do not qualify for this credit.

ECₑ Elevator energy credit achieved for the building

ECₜ C406.2.7.1 Table energy credit

CRₑ Compliance Ratio (F/ F)

FA Sum of floors served by class A elevators

F Sum of floors served by all building elevators and escalators

# For buildings and spaces designated as Group A-2, or facilities whose primary business type involves the use of a commercial kitchen where at least one gas or electric fryer is installed before the issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy all fryers, dishwashers, steam cookers and ovens installed before the issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy shall comply with all of the following:

1. Achieve performance levels in accordance with the equipment specifications listed in Tables C406.2.7.2 (1) through C406.2.7.2 (4) when rated in accordance with the applicable test procedure.
2. Have associated performance levels listed on the construction documents submitted for permitting.
# Heavy-Load Cooking Energy Idle Energy Test

| Standard Open Deep-Fat Gas Fryers       | Efficiency  | Idle Energy Rate  | Procedure |
| --------------------------------------- | ----------- | ----------------- | --------- |
| 50                                      | hr          | (2,600 AST watts) | F1361     |
| Standard Open Deep-Fat Electric Fryers  | Efficiency  | Idle Energy Rate  | Procedure |
| 83                                      | 800 watts   |                   |           |
| Large Vat Open Deep-Fat Gas Fryers      | Efficiency  | Idle Energy Rate  | Procedure |
| 50                                      | hr          | (3,500 AST watts) | F2144     |
| Large Vat Open Deep-Fat Electric Fryers | Efficiency  | Idle Energy Rate  | Procedure |
| 80                                      | 1,100 watts |                   |           |

For SI: TU/h 0.2 3W
| Fuel Type        | Pan Capacity     | Cooking Energy Efficiencyᵃ | Idle Energy Rate | Test Procedure |           |
| ---------------- | ---------------- | -------------------------- | ---------------- | -------------- | --------- |
| Electric Steam   | 3-pan            | 50                         | 400W             |                |           |
| 4-pan            | 50               | 530W                       |                  |                |           |
| 5-pan            | 50               | 670W                       |                  |                |           |
| 6-pan and larger | 50               | 800W                       |                  |                |           |
| Gas Steam        | 3-pan            | 38                         | 6,250 tu/h       | 1.83 kW        | AST F1484 |
|                  | 4-pan            | 38                         | 8,350 tu/h       | 2.45 kW        |           |
|                  | 5-pan            | 38                         | 10,400 tu/h      | 3.05 kW        |           |
|                  | 6-pan and larger | 38                         | 12,500 tu/h      | 3.66 kW        |           |

a. Cooking Energy Efficiency is based on heavy-load (potato) cooking capacity
# High Temperature Efficiency

# Low Temperature Efficiency

| Machine Type                | Idle Energy Ratea | Washing Energy Consumption | Water Rateb            | Idle Energy Ratea | Washing Energy Consumption | Water Rateb | Test Procedure |
| --------------------------- | ----------------- | -------------------------- | ---------------------- | ----------------- | -------------------------- | ----------- | -------------- |
| Under Counter               | 0.30 kW           | 0.35 kWh/rack (3.3 LPR)    | 0.86 GPR               | 0.25 kW           | 0.15 kWh/rack              | 1.1 GPR     |                |
| Stationary Single Tank Door | 0.55 kW           | 0.35 kWh/rack (3.4 LPR)    | 0.8 GPR                | 0.30 kW           | 0.15 kWh/rack              | 4.5 LPR     |                |
| Pot, Pan, and Utensil       | 0.0 kW            | SFrackc (0.55 S rackc)     | 0.58 GPSF (2.2 LPS)    | NA                | NA                         | NA          |                |
| Single Tank Conveyor        | 1.20 kW           | 0.36 kWh/rack (2.6 LPR)    | 0.70 GPR               | 0.85 kW           | 0.16 kWh/rack              | 0.7 GPR     |                |
| Multiple Tank Conveyor      | 1.85 kW           | 0.36 kWh/rack (2.0 LPR)    | 0.54 GPR               | 1.00 kW           | 0.22 kWh/rack              | 0.54 GPR    |                |
| Single Tank Flight Type     | Reported          | Reported                   | 2.75c (LPH 0.276d 208) | 55.0              | NA                         | NA          |                |
| Multiple Tank Flight Type   | Reported          | Reported                   | 4.6c (LPH 0.461d 787)  | 17.00             | NA                         | NA          |                |

a Idle results should be measured with the door closed and represent the total idle energy consumed by the machine including all tank heaters and controls. The most energy consumptive configuration in the product family shall be selected to test the idle energy rate. Booster heater (internal or external) energy consumption shall be measured and reported separately, if possible, per AST F16 6 and AST F1 20 Sections 10.8 and 10. respectively. However, if booster energy cannot be measured separately it will be included in the idle energy rate measurements.

b GPR gallons per rack, LPR Liters per rack, GPSF gallons per square foot of rack, LPS liters per square meter of rack, GPH gallons per hour, c maximum conveyor belt speed (feet/minute) conveyor belt width (feet), LPH liters per hour, d maximum conveyor belt speed (m/minute) conveyor belt width (m).

c PPU Washing Energy is still in format kWh/rack when evaluated SFrack (S rack) is Square.
Feet of rack area (square meters of rack area), same as in PPU water consumption metric.
# Fuel Classification

| Fuel type       |                                     | Idle Rate         | Cooking Energy Efficiency | Test Procedure |
| --------------- | ----------------------------------- | ----------------- | ------------------------- | -------------- |
| Gas             | Full-Size 12,000 tu/h (3.5 kW)      |                   | 46                        | AST F14 6      |
| Electric        | Half-size 1.0 kW                    |                   | 71                        |                |
| Electric        | Full-size 1.60 kW                   |                   |                           |                |
|                 |                                     | Combination Ovens |                           |                |
| Steam Mode      | 200 Pᵃ 6,511 tu/h (0.05 Pᵃ 1. kW)   |                   | 41                        | AST F2861      |
| Convection Mode | 150 Pᵃ 5,425 tu/h (0.044 Pᵃ 1.6 kW) |                   | 56                        |                |
| Steam Mode      | 0.133 Pᵃ 0.6400 kW                  |                   | 55                        |                |
| Electric        | Convection Mode 0.080 Pᵃ 0.48 kW    | 76                |                           |                |
|                 |                                     | Rack Ovens        |                           |                |
| Gas             | Single 25,000 tu/h (7.3 kW)         | 48                | AST F20 3                 |                |
| Gas             | Double 30,000 tu/h (8.8 kW)         | 52                |                           |                |

a. P Pan Capacity: the number of steam table pans the combination oven is able to accommodate in accordance with AST F14 5

For projects with Group R-1 and R-2 occupancies, energy credits shall be achieved where all dishwashers, refrigerators, and freezers comply with all of the following:

1. Achieve the Energy Star Most Efficient 2021 label in accordance with the specifications current as of:
1. Refrigerators and freezers 5.0,  /15/2014
2. Dishwashers 6.0, 1/2 /2016
2. Be installed before the issuance of the certificate of occupancy.

For Group R-1 where only some guest rooms are equipped with both refrigerators and dishwashers, the table credits shall be prorated as follows:
A project not required to comply with C403.2.3 can achieve energy credits for installing a fault detection and diagnostics system to monitor the HVAC system's performance and automatically identify faults. The installed system shall comply with items 1 through 6 in Section C403.2.3.

Renewable energy and load management measures installed in the building that comply with Sections C406.3.1 through C406.3.8 shall achieve the credits listed for the occupancy group in Tables C406.3(1) through C406.3( ) or where calculations are required in Sections C406.3 to determine credits or modify the table credits, the credits achieved shall be based upon the Section C406.3 calculations. Measure credits achieved shall be determined in one of two ways, depending on the measure:

1. The measure credit shall be the base energy credit for the measure where no adjustment factor or formula is shown in the description of the measure in Section C406.3.
2. The measure credit shall be the base energy credit for the measure adjusted by a factor or formula as stated in the description of the measure in Section C406.3. Where adjustments are applied, each energy credit shall be rounded to the nearest whole number.

Load management and renewable credits achieved for the project shall be the sum of credits for individual measures included in the project. Credits are available for the measures listed in this Section. Where a project contains multiple building use groups credits achieved for each building use group shall be summed and then weighted by the gross floor area of each building use group to determine the weighted average project energy credits achieved.

The load management measures in Sections C406.3.2 (G01) through C406.3.7 (G06) require load management control sequences that are capable of and configured to automatically provide the load management operation specified based on indication of a peak period related to high short-term electric prices, grid condition, or peak building load. Such a peak period shall, where possible, be initiated by a demand response signal from the controlling entity, such as a utility or service operator. When communications are disabled or unavailable, all demand responsive controls shall continue backup demand response based on a local schedule or building demand monitoring. The local building schedule shall be adjustable without programming and reflect the electric rate peak period dates and times.

The load management control sequences shall be activated for peak period control by either:

1. A certified OpenADR 2.0a or OpenADR 2.0b Virtual End Node (VEN), as specified under Clause 11, Conformance, in the applicable OpenADR 2.0 Specification, or
2. A device certified by the manufacturer as being capable of responding to a demand response signal from a certified OpenADR 2.0b VEN by automatically implementing the control functions requested by the VEN for the equipment it controls, or
3. A device that complies with IEC 62726-10-1, an international standard for the open automated demand response system interface between the appliance, system, or energy management system and the controlling entity, or
4. An interface that complies with the communication protocol required by a controlling entity, to participate in an automated demand response program, or
5. Where the controlling entity does not have a demand response program or protocol available, local demand response control shall be provided based on either:
reflects the electric rate peak period dates and times. In this case a binary input to the control system shall be provided that activates the demand response sequence.
|                          |          | T   | C   | R   | O   | G   | T   | CR | IT | GROUP R |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
| ------------------------ | -------- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | -- | -- | ------- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- |
| R01                      | G01      | G02 | G03 | G04 | G05 | G06 | G07 |    |    |         |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
| Renewable Energy         | C406.3.1 | 15  | 11  | 17  | 18  | 20  | 1   | 21 | 13 | 10      | 13 | 11 | 10 | 10 | 7  |    |    |    |    |    |
| Lighting load management | C406.3.2 | 16  | 7   | 12  | 12  | 16  | 11  | 14 | 12 | 11      | 16 | 14 | 8  | 11 | 5  | 7  | 7  | 11 |    |    |
| HVAC load management     | C406.3.3 | 42  | 41  | 21  | 35  | 23  | 37  | 30 | 28 | 28      | 17 | 33 | 24 | 20 | 22 | 23 | 10 | 13 | 15 | 17 |
| Automated shading        | C406.3.4 | 11  | x   | 7   | 18  | 10  | 13  | 5  | 13 | 12      | 2  | 14 | 7  | 10 | 13 | 11 | 1  | 8  | 8  | 16 |
| Electric energy storage  | C406.3.5 | 10  | 10  | 10  | 11  | 10  | 13  | 13 | 14 | 17      | 16 | 13 | 17 | 14 | 13 | 17 | 14 | 14 | 14 | 15 |
| Cooling energy storage   | C406.3.6 | 28  | 6   | 31  | 13  | 22  | 21  | 21 | 37 | 11      | 12 | 22 | 11 | 17 | 7  | 17 | 2  | 3  |    |    |
| SHW energy storage       | C406.3.7 | 17  | 17  | 1   | 18  | 1   | 1   | 20 | 20 | 22      | 1  | 1  | 21 | 1  | 1  | 20 | 18 | 1  | 18 | 17 |
| Building thermal mass    | C406.3.8 | 7   | 2   | 11  | 5   | 16  | 28  | 22 | 27 | 60      | 1  | 43 | 46 | 32 | 58 | 37 | 27 | 45 | 40 | 1  |

Credits excluded from this building use type and climate one.
|   |   | T | C |    |    |    |     |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |
| - | - | - | - | -- | -- | -- | --- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |
| R | O | G | T | CR | IT | OR | GRO | P | I | O | C | P | I | C | I |

# 1. Renewable Energy

| R01 | Renewable Energy | C406.3.1 | 6 | 6 | 6 | 6 | 6 | 8 | 7 | 8 | 6 | 6 | 7 | 7 | 6 | 7 | 5 | 4 |
| --- | ---------------- | -------- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |

# 2. Lighting load management

| G01 | Lighting load | C406.3.2 | 11 | 12 | 13 | 13 | 13 | 12 | 12 | 12 | 6 | 13 | 16 | 12 | 13 | 14 | 15 | 14 | 14 | 12 | 12 |
| --- | ------------- | -------- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | - | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- |

# 3. HVAC load management

| G02 | HVAC load | C406.3.3 | 10 | 11 | 10 | 10 | 8 | 21 | 10 | 10 | 13 | 11 | 18 | 11 | 12 | 14 | 13 | 12 | 11 | 7 |
| --- | --------- | -------- | -- | -- | -- | -- | - | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | - |

# 4. Automated shading

| G03 | Automated shading | C406.3.4 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | x | x | x | 1 | x | x | 2 | x | x | 1 | 1 | x |
| --- | ----------------- | -------- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |

# 5. Electric energy storage

| G04 | Electric energy | C406.3.5 | 13 | 13 | 13 | 13 | 14 | 15 | 14 | 15 | 15 | 14 | 15 | 15 | 13 | 14 | 13 | 12 |
| --- | --------------- | -------- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- |

# 6. Cooling energy storage

| G05 | Cooling energy | C406.3.6 | 25 | 6 | 33 | 14 | 25 | 1 | 27 | 37 | 27 | 16 | 22 | 1 | 14 | 18 | 11 | 11 | 20 | 2 | 3 |
| --- | -------------- | -------- | -- | - | -- | -- | -- | - | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | - | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | - | - |

# 7. SHW energy storage

| G06 | SHW energy | C406.3.7 | 4 | 4 | 4 | 4 | 4 | 4 | 4 | 4 | 4 | 5 | 4 | 4 | 4 | 4 | 4 | 4 | 4 | 4 |
| --- | ---------- | -------- | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |

# 8. Building thermal mass

| G07 | Building thermal | C406.3.8 | 6 | 2 | 10 | 4 | 15 | 25 | 20 | 24 | 57 | 18 | 3 | 44 | 31 | 53 | 33 | 25 | 40 | 34 | 14 |
| --- | ---------------- | -------- | - | - | -- | - | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | - | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- |

Credits excluded from this building use type and climate zone.
# Energy Credit Section

| Abbreviated Title        | ID | R01      | G01 | G02 | G03 | G04 | G05 | G06 | G07 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
| ------------------------ | -- | -------- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- |
| Renewable energy         |    | C406.3.1 | 8   | 12  | 11  | 11  | 10  | 12  |     | 13 | 12 | 8  | 11 | 8  | 7  | 5  |    |    |    |    |    |
| Lighting load management |    | C406.3.2 | 12  | 12  | 11  | 12  | 12  | 14  | 14  | 13 | 15 | 14 | 13 | 11 | 10 | 11 | 14 | 11 | 8  | 8  |    |
| HVAC load management     |    | C406.3.3 | x   | x   | x   | x   | x   | x   | x   | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  |    |    |
| Automated shading        |    | C406.3.4 | 2   | 2   | 2   | 3   | 1   | 2   | 3   | 2  | 4  | 3  | 2  | 1  | 1  | 1  | 3  | 1  | 2  | 1  |    |
| Electric energy storage  |    | C406.3.5 |     | 10  | 10  | 13  | 13  | 15  |     | 13 | 14 | 13 | 14 | 14 | 12 | 16 | 13 | 12 | 12 | 13 |    |
| Cooling energy storage   |    | C406.3.6 | 31  | 7   | 38  | 17  | 2   | 24  | 31  | 44 | 26 | 18 | 26 | 16 | 15 | 21 | 11 | 12 | 24 | 2  | 4  |
| SHW energy storage       |    | C406.3.7 | 25  | 25  | 28  | 26  | 28  | 2   | 2   | 30 | 31 | 2  | 30 | 31 | 28 | 2  | 31 | 26 | 28 | 25 | 24 |
| Building thermal mass    |    | C406.3.8 | 6   | 1   | 10  | 4   | 14  | 24  | 1   | 23 | 53 | 17 | 38 | 41 | 30 | 52 | 33 | 26 | 42 | 37 | 17 |

Credits excluded from this building use type and climate zone.
# Energy Credit Section

| ID  | Abbreviated Title        | Section  | 0A | 1A | 2A | 2  | 3A | 3  | 3C | 4A | 4 | 4C | 5A | 5  | 5C | 6A | 6  | 7  | 8  |    |    |    |   |
| --- | ------------------------ | -------- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | - | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | - |
| R01 | Renewable energy         | C406.3.1 | 14 | 14 | 17 | 15 | 17 | 1  | 18 | 22 |   | 24 | 17 | 22 | 16 | 14 | 18 | 18 | 14 | 17 | 14 | 11 |   |
| G01 | Lighting load management | C406.3.2 | 10 | 11 | 11 | 12 | 11 | 11 | 11 | 12 |   | 10 | 11 | 10 | 10 | 11 | 10 | 10 | 11 | 10 |    |    |   |
| G02 | HVAC load management     | C406.3.3 | x  | 10 | 10 |    | 3  | 8  | 12 |    | 7 | 12 | 8  | 11 | 10 | 12 | 8  | 10 | 2  |    |    |    |   |
| G03 | Automated shading        | C406.3.4 | 4  | 7  | 7  | 8  | 7  |    | 8  | 5  | 6 |    | 6  | 4  | 6  | 5  | 4  | 5  | 5  | 5  | 5  | 4  | 7 |
| G04 | Electric energy storage  | C406.3.5 | 14 | 15 | 14 | 14 | 16 | 16 | 17 | 16 |   | 18 | 17 | 16 | 18 | 17 | 17 | 18 | 16 | 15 | 17 | 18 |   |
| G05 | Cooling energy storage   | C406.3.6 | 28 | 7  | 36 | 16 | 27 | 24 | 28 | 45 |   | 27 | 17 | 27 | 15 | 15 | 20 |    | 12 | 25 | 2  | 4  |   |
| G06 | SHW energy storage       | C406.3.7 | 5  | 5  | 6  | 6  | 6  |    | 6  | 7  |   | 8  | 7  | 7  | 7  | 7  | 8  | 6  | 7  | 6  | 6  |    |   |
| G07 | Building thermal mass    | C406.3.8 | 3  | 1  | 5  | 2  | 6  |    | 6  | 7  |   | 14 | 4  | 11 | 8  |    | 15 | 5  | 8  | 12 | 15 | 7  |   |

Credits excluded from this building use type and climate one.
| T           | C             | R        | C         | G        | O       |
| ----------- | ------------- | -------- | --------- | -------- | ------- |
| Energy      | Climate       | one      | ID        | Credit   | Section |
| Abbreviated | Title         | R01      | Renewable | C406.3.1 | 2       |
|             |               |          | 2         | 2        | 2       |
|             |               |          | 2         | 2        | 3       |
|             |               |          |           | 4        | 2       |
|             |               |          | 3         | 2        | 2       |
|             |               |          | 3         | 2        | 2       |
|             |               |          | 2         | 2        | 1       |
| G01         | Lighting load | C406.3.2 | 4         | 4        | 5       |
|             |               |          | 5         | 4        |         |
|             |               |          | 5         | 5        |         |
|             |               |          | 5         | 4        | 5       |
|             |               |          | 5         | 4        | 4       |
|             |               |          | 5         | 4        | 1       |
| G02         | HVAC load     | C406.3.3 | 32        | 26       | 37      |
|             |               |          | 28        | 31       | 26      |
|             |               |          | 27        | 22       |         |
|             |               |          | 23        | 20       | 17      |
|             |               |          | 14        | 1        | 14      |
|             |               |          | 10        | 16       | 14      |
| G03         | Automated     | C406.3.4 | x         | x        | x       |
|             |               |          | x         | x        |         |
|             |               |          | x         | x        | x       |
|             |               |          | x         | x        | x       |
| G04         | Electric      | C406.3.5 | 4         | 4        | 4       |
|             |               |          | 4         | 5        |         |
|             |               |          | 5         | 5        |         |
|             |               |          | 4         | 4        | 4       |
|             |               |          | 3         | 4        | 4       |
|             |               |          | 4         | 3        | 3       |
| G05         | Cooling       | C406.3.6 | 15        | 4        | 17      |
|             |               |          | 8         |          | 12      |
|             |               |          | 10        | 10       | 16      |
|             |               |          | 6         | 5        | 7       |
|             |               |          | 3         | 3        | 4       |
|             |               |          | 1         | 2        | 4       |
|             |               |          | x         | x        |         |
| G06         | SHW energy    | C406.3.7 | 13        | 13       | 15      |
|             |               |          | 14        | 15       | 16      |
|             |               |          | 16        | 17       |         |
|             |               |          | 1         | 16       | 17      |
|             |               |          | 1         | 16       | 17      |
|             |               |          | 18        | 15       | 16      |
|             |               |          | 14        | 13       |         |
| G07         | building      | C406.3.8 | 3         | 1        | 5       |
|             |               |          | 2         | 7        | 12      |
|             |               |          | 8         | 10       |         |
|             |               |          | 21        | 6        | 15      |
|             |               |          | 14        | 8        | 18      |
|             |               |          | 10        | 6        | 12      |
|             |               |          | 8         | 3        |         |

Credits excluded from this building use type and climate one.
|   |   | T | C |   |
| - | - | - | - | - |
| R |   | C | G | O |

# Energy Credit Section

| ID  | Abbreviated Title        | Section  | 0A | 0  | 1A | 1  | 2A | 2  | 3A | 3  | 3C | 4A | 4  | 4C | 5A | 5  | 5C | 6A | 6  | 7  | 8  |   |
| --- | ------------------------ | -------- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | - |
| R01 | Renewable energy         | C406.3.1 | 8  | 8  | 12 | 11 | 12 | 12 | 17 |    |    | 17 | 11 | 13 | 10 | 11 | 10 | 10 | 6  |    |    |   |
| G01 | Lighting load management | C406.3.2 | 16 | 16 | 18 | 1  | 17 | 1  | 1  | 21 |    | 17 | 18 | 21 | 21 | 18 | 21 | 22 | 18 | 16 |    |   |
| G02 | HVAC load management     | C406.3.3 | x  | 15 | 16 | 15 | 15 | 6  | 15 | 21 |    | 13 | 23 | 15 | 23 | 17 | 1  | 26 | 14 | 17 | 18 | 3 |
| G03 | Automated shading        | C406.3.4 | 7  | 11 | 11 | 12 | 11 | 13 | 10 | 11 |    | 11 | 7  | 11 | 11 | 8  | 10 | 11 | 8  | 8  | 12 |   |
| G04 | Electric energy storage  | C406.3.5 | 6  | 10 | 8  | 10 | 11 | 12 | 11 | 10 |    | 14 | 11 | 10 | 12 | 10 | 11 | 12 | 11 | 10 | 8  |   |
| G05 | Cooling energy storage   | C406.3.6 | 40 |    | 51 | 22 | 35 | 31 | 34 | 53 |    | 21 | 17 | 28 | 10 | 11 | 1  | 4  | 18 | 2  | 2  |   |
| G06 | SHW energy storage       | C406.3.7 | 3  | 3  | 4  | 3  | 4  | 4  | 4  |    | 5  | 4  | 4  | 5  | 4  | 4  | 5  | 4  | 4  | 3  |    |   |
| G07 | Building thermal mass    | C406.3.8 | 5  | 1  | 6  | 3  | 8  | 12 | 10 |    | 20 | 7  | 17 | 15 | 14 | 24 | 10 | 13 | 20 | 24 | 12 |   |

Credits excluded from this building use type and climate one.
# Energy Credit Section

| ID  | Abbreviated Title        | Section  | 0A | 1A | 2A | 3A | 3C | 4A | 4C | 5A | 5  | 5C | 6A | 6  | 7  | 8  |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
| --- | ------------------------ | -------- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- |
| R01 | Renewable Energy         | C406.3.1 | 10 | 11 | 13 | 12 | 13 | 16 | 15 |    | 21 |    | 22 | 15 | 1  | 15 | 14 | 17 | 16 | 13 | 16 | 12 | 10 |
| G01 | Lighting load management | C406.3.2 | 7  | 12 | 12 | 13 | 13 | 15 | 14 | 16 |    | 13 | 12 | 16 | 16 | 10 | 14 | 18 | 16 | 13 | 14 |    |    |
| G02 | HVAC load management     | C406.3.3 | 18 | 22 | 32 | 23 | 25 | 31 | 26 |    | 20 | 23 | 31 | 24 | 20 | 31 | 12 | 18 | 27 | 16 |    |    |    |
| G03 | Automated shading        | C406.3.4 | 7  | 13 | 16 | 12 | 18 | 17 | 17 | 18 |    | 13 | 12 | 17 | 17 | 10 | 15 | 13 | 14 | 10 | 16 | 17 |    |
| G04 | Electric energy storage  | C406.3.5 | 16 | 16 | 18 | 17 | 1  | 21 | 21 | 23 |    | 26 | 22 | 24 | 24 | 23 | 24 | 24 | 20 | 22 | 1  | 1  |    |
| G05 | Cooling energy storage   | C406.3.6 | 36 |    | 46 | 21 | 36 | 32 | 3  | 62 |    | 3  | 24 | 37 | 22 | 20 | 28 | 13 | 16 | 31 | 3  | 4  |    |
| G06 | SHW energy storage       | C406.3.7 | 5  | 5  | 6  | 5  | 6  | 6  | 7  |    | 8  | 7  | 7  | 8  | 7  | 7  | 8  | 7  | 7  | 6  |    |    |    |
| G07 | Building thermal mass    | C406.3.8 | 7  | 2  | 11 | 5  | 17 | 28 | 23 | 27 |    | 63 | 21 | 44 | 48 | 37 | 60 | 38 | 31 | 50 | 47 | 21 |    |

Credits excluded from this building use type and climate zone.
|   |   | T | C |   |
| - | - | - | - | - |
| R |   | C | G | O |

# Energy Credit Section

| Title                    | ID  | Abbreviated | 0A | 1A | 2A | 3A | 3C | 4A | 4  | 4C | 5A | 5  | 5C | 6A | 6  | 7  | 8  |    |    |    |    |    |
| ------------------------ | --- | ----------- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- |
| Renewable Energy         | R01 | C406.3.1    | 38 | 37 | 55 | 45 | 53 | 53 | 4  | 58 |    | 66 | 36 | 56 | 38 | 2  | 41 | 36 | 24 | 32 | 23 | 16 |
| Lighting load management | G01 | C406.3.2    | 13 | 26 | 32 | 28 | 32 | 35 | 36 | 31 | 27 | 37 | 32 | 23 | 28 | 36 | 22 | 25 | 22 |    |    |    |
| HVAC load management     | G02 | C406.3.3    | 18 | 46 | 37 | 37 | 28 | 36 | 2  | 26 | 22 | 23 | 17 | 12 | 16 | 13 | 5  | 14 | 8  | 10 | 3  |    |
| Automated shading        | G03 | C406.3.4    | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  | x  |    |    |
| Electric energy storage  | G04 | C406.3.5    | 40 | 40 | 47 | 41 | 47 | 44 | 40 | 44 | 42 | 30 | 38 | 31 | 21 | 31 | 26 | 24 | 2  | 23 | 21 |    |
| Cooling energy storage   | G05 | C406.3.6    | 20 | 5  | 21 | 11 | 14 | 14 | 11 | 21 | 5  | 5  | 2  | 2  | 5  | 1  | 1  | 3  | x  | x  |    |    |
| SHW energy storage       | G06 | C406.3.7    | 3  | 3  | 3  | 3  | 4  | 3  | 4  | 4  | 4  | 3  | 4  | 4  | 3  | 3  | 4  | 2  | 2  | 2  | 2  |    |
| Building thermal mass    | G07 | C406.3.8    | 7  | 2  | 12 | 5  | 17 | 2  | 23 | 28 | 66 | 18 | 44 | 47 | 28 | 56 | 37 | 20 | 3  | 2  | 13 |    |

“x” indicates measure is not available for building occupancy in that climate zone.
# Energy Credit Section

| ID  | Abbreviated Title        | Section  | 0A | 1A | 2A | 3A | 3C | 4A | 4  | 4C | 5A | 5  | 5C | 6A | 6  | 7  | 8  |    |    |    |    |    |
| --- | ------------------------ | -------- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- |
| R01 | Renewable Energy         | C406.3.1 | 12 | 13 | 16 | 14 | 16 | 18 | 17 | 20 |    | 21 | 13 | 18 | 13 | 12 | 15 | 14 | 11 | 13 | 10 | 8  |
| G01 | Lighting load management | C406.3.2 | 11 | 13 | 14 | 14 | 14 | 16 | 15 | 16 |    | 14 | 14 | 16 | 16 | 13 | 14 | 16 | 14 | 13 | 12 | 12 |
| G02 | HVAC load management     | C406.3.3 | 24 | 24 | 23 | 22 | 20 | 23 | 21 | 21 |    | 18 | 18 | 20 | 17 | 16 | 18 | 14 | 13 | 14 | 13 | 6  |
| G03 | Automated shading        | C406.3.4 | 5  | 6  | 7  | 8  | 7  |    | 8  | 5  |    | 7  | 5  | 8  | 7  | 5  | 6  | 6  |    |    |    |    |
| G04 | Electric energy storage  | C406.3.5 | 14 | 15 | 16 | 15 | 16 | 17 | 17 | 18 |    | 1  | 16 | 17 | 17 | 15 | 16 | 17 | 14 | 15 | 14 | 14 |
| G05 | Cooling energy storage   | C406.3.6 | 28 | 7  | 34 | 15 | 25 | 22 | 25 | 3  |    | 20 | 14 | 22 | 12 | 11 | 17 | 7  | 18 | 2  | 3  |    |
| G06 | SHW energy storage       | C406.3.7 |    | 11 | 10 | 11 | 11 | 11 | 12 |    | 13 | 11 | 12 | 13 | 11 | 11 | 12 | 10 | 11 | 10 |    |    |
| G07 | Building thermal mass    | C406.3.8 | 6  | 2  |    | 4  | 13 | 21 | 16 | 20 |    | 44 | 14 | 31 | 33 | 24 | 42 | 25 | 20 | 33 | 2  | 13 |

a. Other occupancy groups include all Groups except for Groups A-2, E, I, and R.

Projects installing on-site renewable energy systems with a capacity of at least 0.1 watts per gross square foot (1.08W/m²) of building area or securing off-site renewable energy shall achieve energy credits for this measure calculated as follows:

ECR C406.3.1 R01 energy credits achieved for this project

Rₜ Actual total rating of on-site renewable energy systems (W)

PGFA Project gross floor area, ft²

EC0.1 C406.3.1 R01 base credits from Tables C406.3(1) through C406.3( )

ROFF Actual total equivalent rating of off-site renewable energy contracts (W), calculated as follows:

ROFF TRE/(REN + 20)

where:

TRE Total off-site renewable electrical energy in kilowatt-hours (kWh) that is procured in accordance with Sections C405.13.2.1 through C405.13.4

REN Annual off-site renewable electrical energy from Table C405.13.2, in units of kilowatt-
# hours per watt of array capacity

Rex Rating (W) of renewable energy resources capacity excluded from credit calculated as follows:

Rex = RRr + RRx + RRc

where:

- RRr = Rating of on-site renewable energy systems required by Section C405.13.1, without exception (W).
- RRx = Rating of renewable energy resources used to meet any exceptions of this code (W).
- RRc = Rating of renewable energy resources used to achieve other energy credits in Section C406 (W).

Where renewable requirements, exceptions, or credits are expressed in annual kWh or tu rather than Watts of output capacity, they shall be converted as 3413 tu = 1 kWh and converted to W equivalent capacity as follows:

RRw = Actual total equivalent rating of renewable energy capacity (W), calculated as follows:

RRw = TREx / (REN + PGFA)

where:

- TREx = Total renewable energy in kilowatt-hours (kWh) that is excluded from R01 energy credits

# C G

Luminaires shall have dimming capability and automatic load management controls that shall gradually reduce general lighting power during peak periods. The load management controls shall reduce lighting power in 75 percent of the building area by at least 20 percent with continuous dimming over a period no longer than 15 minutes. Where less than 75 percent, but at least 50 percent of the project general lighting is controlled, the credits from Tables C406.3 shall be prorated as follows:

Warehouse or retail storage building areas shall be permitted to achieve this credit by switching off at least 25 percent of lighting power in 75 percent of the building area without dimming, or as adjusted by Evaluation 4-2.

# C G H C

Automatic load management controls shall be configured:

1. Where electric cooling is in use to gradually increase the cooling setpoint by at least 3 °F (1.7 °C) over a minimum of three hours or reduce effective cooling capacity to 60% of installed capacity during the peak period.
2. Where electric heating is in use to gradually decrease the heating setpoint by at least 3 °F (1.7 °C) over a minimum of three hours or reduce effective heating capacity to 60% of installed capacity during the peak period.
3. Where HVAC systems are serving multiple zones and have less than 70 percent outdoor air required, include controls that provide excess outdoor air preceding the peak period and reduce outdoor air by at least 30 percent during the peak period, in accordance with ASHRAE Standard 62.1 Section 6.2.5.2 Short Term Conditions or provisions for approved engineering analysis in the International Mechanical Code Section 403.3.1.1, Outdoor Airflow.
Where fenestration on east, south, and west exposures exceeds 20 percent of wall area, load management credits shall be achieved as follows:

1. Automatic exterior shading devices or dynamic glazing that are capable of reducing solar gain (SHGC) through sunlit fenestration by at least 50 percent when fully closed shall receive the full credits in Tables C406.3(1) through C406.3( ). The exterior shades shall have fully open and fully closed SHGC determined in accordance with AERC 1.
2. Automatic interior shading devices with a minimum solar reflectance of 0.50 for the surface facing the fenestration shall receive 40 percent of the credits in Tables C406.3(1) through C406.3( ).
3. All shading devices, dynamic glazing, or shading attachments shall:
1. Provide at least 0 percent coverage of the total fenestration on east, south, and west exposures in the building.
2. Be automatically controlled and shall modulate in multiple steps or continuously the amount of solar gain and light transmitted into the space in response to peak periods and either daylight levels or solar intensity.
3. Include a manual override located in the same enclosed space as the shaded vertical fenestration that shall override operation of automatic controls no longer than four hours. Such override shall be locked out during peak periods.

For this section, directional east, south, or west exposures shall exclude fenestration that is plus or minus 45 degrees of facing true north in the northern hemisphere. In the southern hemisphere, where the south exposure is referred to, it shall be replaced by the north exposure and the referenced south exposure shall be replaced by the north exposure.

Electric storage devices shall be charged and discharged by automatic load management controls to store energy during non-peak periods and use stored energy during peak periods to reduce building demand. Electric storage devices shall have a minimum capacity of 1.5 Wh/ft² (87 Wh/m²) of gross building area. Base credits in Tables C406.3-1 through C406.3-8 are based on installed electric storage of 5 Wh/ft² (54 Wh/m²) and shall be prorated for actual installed storage capacity between 1.5 and 15 Wh/ft² (16 to 160 Wh/m²), as follows:

Larger energy storage shall be permitted however, credits are limited to the range of 1.5 to 15 Wh/ft² (16 to 160 Wh/m²).

Automatic load management controls shall be capable of activating ice or chilled water storage equipment to reduce demand during summer peak periods. Storage tank standby loss shall be demonstrated through analysis to be no more than 2.
percent of storage capacity over a 24 hour period for the cooling design day. ase credits in Section C406.3 are based on storage capacity of the design peak hour cooling load with a 1.15 si ing factor. Credits shall be prorated for installed storage systems si ed between 0.5 and 4.0 times the design day peak hour cooling load, rounded to the nearest whole credit. Larger storage shall be permitted but the associated credits are limited to the range above.

# Energy credits shall be determined as follows:

| ECs   | Cooling Storage credit achieved for Pro ect                                                                                             |
| ----- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| EC1.0 | G05 base energy credit for building use type and climate one based on 1.0 ton-hours storage per design day ton (kWh/kW) of cooling load |
| SR    | Storage ratio in ton-hours storage per design day ton (kWh/kW) of cooling load where 0.5 SR 4.0                                         |

C G H

C G H Where SHW is heated by electricity, automatic load management controls comply with ANSI/CTA-2045- shall preheat stored SHW before the peak period and suspend electric water heating during the peak period. Storage capacity shall be provided by either:

1. Preheating water above 140 F (60 C) delivery temperature with at least 1.34 kWh of energy storage per kW of water-heating capacity. Tempering valves shall be provided at the water heater delivery location.
2. Providing additional heated water tank storage capacity above peak SHW demand with equivalent peak storage capacity to item 1. Where heat pump water heating is used, the credits achieved shall be 1/3 of the credits in Tables C406.3(1) through C406.3( ).

C G T

C G T The pro ect shall have additional passive interior mass and a night flush control of the HVAC system. The credit is available to pro ects that have at least 80 percent of gross floor area unoccupied between midnight and 6:00 a.m. The pro ect shall meet the following re uirements:

1. Interior to the building envelo e insulation, provide 10 lb/ft(50 kg/m) of pro ect conditioned floor area of passive thermal mass in the building interior all, the inside of the exterior all, or interior floor construction. Mass construction shall have mass surfaces directly contacting the air in conditioned spaces with directly attached gypsum panels allowed. Mass with carpet or furred gypsum panels or exterior wall mass that is on the exterior of the insulation layer (e.g., the portion of C U block on the exterior of insulation filled cell cavities) shall not be included toward the building mass required.
2. HVAC units for 80 percent or more of the supply airflow in the pro ect shall be e uipped with outdoor air economizers and fans that have variable or low speed capable of operating at 66 percent or lower airflow and be included in the night flush control se uence.
3. Night flush controls shall be configured with the following se uence or another night flush strategy shall be permitted where demonstrated to be effective, avoids added morning heating, and is approved by the authority having jurisdiction.
below 45 F (7 C). During summer mode, the occupied cooling set point shall be set 1 F (0.6 C) higher than normal and the occupied heating set point shall be reset 2 F (1.1 C) lower than normal.

# 3.2. When all the following conditions exist, night flush shall be activated:

3.2.1. Summer mode is active in accordance with item 3.1.

3.2.2. Outdoor air temperature is 5 F (2.8 C) or more below indoor average one temperature.

3.2.3. Indoor average one temperature is greater than morning occupied heating set point.

3.2.4. In climate zones 0A through 3A, outdoor dewpoint is below 50 F (10 C) or outdoor air enthalpy is less than indoor air enthalpy.

3.2.5. Local time is between 10:00 pm and 6:00 am.

# 3.3. When night flush is active, a to ati night flush controls shall operate outdoor air e ono i ers at low fan speed not exceeding 66 percent during the unoccupied period with the ani al cooling and heating locked out.

# CTIO C I T I I G P R OR C

# CTIO C

# I T I I G P R OR C

This section establishes criteria for compliance using simulated building performance. The following systems and loads shall be included in determining the simulated building performance: heating systems, cooling systems, service water heating, fan systems, lighting power, receptacle loads and process loads.

Energy used to recharge or refuel vehicles that are used for on-road and off-site transportation purposes.

# Compliance based on total building performance requires that a proposed design meet all of the following:

1. The requirements of the sections indicated within T C.

2. An annual energy cost that is less than or equal to the percent of the annual energy cost (PAEC) of the standard reference design calculated in Equation 4-32. Energy prices shall be taken from a source approved by the code officials, such as the Department of Energy, Energy Information Administration's state Energy data system criteria and Expenditures reports. Code officials shall be permitted to require time-of-use pricing in energy cost calculations. The reduction in energy cost of the proposed design associated with on-site renewable energy shall be not more than 5 percent of the total energy cost. The amount of renewable energy purchased from off-site sources shall be the same in the standard reference design and the proposed design.

1. Jurisdictions that require site energy (1 kWh = 3413 Btu) rather than energy cost as the metric of comparison.

2. Where energy use based on source energy expressed in Btu or Btu per square foot of conditioned floor area is substituted for the energy cost, the energy use shall be calculated.
using source energy factors from Table C407.2(2) For electricity, U.S. locations shall use values eGRID subregions. Locations outside the United States shall use the value for All other electricity or locally derived values.

PAEC Percentage of annual energy cost applied to standard reference design

ECᵣ Energy efficiency credits required for the building in accordance with Section C406.1 (do not include load management and renewable credits)
# C401.3

# Thermal envelope certificate

# C402.2.1.1

oints staggered

# C402.2.1.2

Skylight curbs

# C402.2.6

Insulation of radiant heating system

# C

Air leakage thermal envelope

# C

Calculation of heating and cooling loads

# C

Data centers

# C

System design

# C

Heating and cooling equipment efficiencies

# C

Thermostatic controls

# C403.4.2

Off-hour controls

# C403.4.7

HVAC system controls for operable openings to the outdoors

# C

Economizer fault detection and diagnostics

# C

Ventilation and exhaust systems

# C

Fan and fan controls

# C

Large-diameter ceiling fans

# C

Refrigeration equipment performance

# C

Construction of HVAC system elements

# C

Mechanical systems located outside of the building thermal envelope

# C

Service water heating

# C

Electrical power and lighting systems

# C406.1.2

Additional renewable and load management credit requirements

# C

Maintenance information and system commissioning

a. Reference to a code section includes all the relative subsections except as indicated in the table.
# T C

# O RC RGY CO R IO CTOR OR CTRICITY

# Fossil Fuels Delivered to Buildings

| Natural Gas                             | 1.02  |
| --------------------------------------- | ----- |
| LPG or Propane                          | 1.151 |
| Fuel Oil (Residual)                     | 1.11  |
| Fuel Oil (Distillate)                   | 1.158 |
| Coal                                    | 1.048 |
| Gasoline                                | 1.187 |
| Other Fuels Not Specified in This Table | 1.048 |

# Electricity

| A GD-ASCC Alaska Grid          | 2.47 |
| ------------------------------ | ---- |
| A S-ASCC Miscellaneous         | 1.35 |
| A N -WECC Southwest            | 2.57 |
| CA -WECC California            | 1.66 |
| ERCT-ERCOT All                 | 2.32 |
| FRCC-FRCC All                  | 2.78 |
| HI S-HICC Miscellaneous        | 3.15 |
| HIOA-HICC Oahu                 | 3.87 |
| ROE- RO East                   | 2.2  |
| ROW- RO West                   | 2.21 |
| NEWE-NPCC New England          | 2.66 |
| NWPP-WECC Northwest            | 1.48 |
| NYCW-NPCC NYC/Westchester      | 2.8  |
| NYLI-NPCC Long Island          | 2.84 |
| NYUP-NPCC Upstate NY           | 1.81 |
| PR S-Puerto Rico Miscellaneous | 3.27 |
| RFCE-RFC East                  | 2.0  |
| RFC -RFC Michigan              | 2.3  |
| RFCW-RFC West                  | 2.7  |
| R PA-WECC Rockies              | 2.16 |
| SPNO-SPP North                 | 2.21 |
| SPSO-SPP South                 | 2.05 |
| SR V-SERC Mississippi Valley   | 2.84 |
| SR W-SERC Midwest              | 3.0  |
| SRSO-SERC South                | 2.8  |

# Tennessee Valley

| SRTV-SERC Tennessee Valley  | 2.82 |
| --------------------------- | ---- |
| SRVC-SERC Virginia/Carolina | 2.1  |
| All other electricity       | 2.51 |

# Thermal energy

| Chilled water | 0.60 |
| ------------- | ---- |
| Steam         | 1.84 |
| Hot water     | 1.73 |

Documentation verifying that the methods and accuracy of compliance software tools conform to the provisions of this section shall be provided to the code official.

Permit submittals shall include a report documenting that the proposed design has annual energy costs less than or equal to the annual energy costs of the standard reference design. The compliance documentation shall include the following information:

1. Address of the building.
2. An inspection checklist documenting the building component characteristics of the proposed design as specified in T C.
3. Name of individual completing the compliance report.
4. Name and version of the compliance software tool.

The code official shall be permitted to require the following documents:

1. Documentation of the building component characteristics of the standard reference design.
2. Thermal zoning diagrams consisting of floor plans showing the thermal zoning scheme for standard reference design and proposed design.
3. Input and output reports from the energy analysis simulation program containing the complete input and output files, as applicable. The output file shall include energy use totals and energy use by energy source and end-use served, total hours that space conditioning loads are not met and any errors or warning messages generated by the simulation tool as applicable.
4. An explanation of any error or warning messages appearing in the simulation tool output.
5. A certification signed by the builder providing the building component characteristics of the proposed design as given in T C.
6. Documentation of the reduction in energy use associated with on-site renewable energy.
Except as specified by this section, the standard reference design and proposed design shall be configured and analyzed using identical methods and techniques.

The standard reference design and proposed design shall be configured and analyzed as specified by T C. T C shall include by reference all notes contained in T C.
# Space use classification

The space use classification shall be chosen in accordance with T C or C for all areas of the building covered by this permit. Where the space use classification for a building is not known, the building shall be categorized as an office building.

# Roofs

| Type              | insulation entirely above deck                                                                |
| ----------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Gross area        | same as proposed                                                                              |
| -factor           | as specified in T C                                                                           |
| Solar absorptance | 0.75, except as specified in Section C402.4 and Table C402.4 for Climate zones 0, 1, 2, and 3 |
| Emittance         | 0.0, except as specified in Section C402.4 and Table C402.4 for Climate zones 0, 1, 2, and 3  |
| Type              | same as proposed                                                                              |
| Gross area        | same as proposed                                                                              |
| -factor           | as specified in T C                                                                           |

# Walls, above-grade

| heat transfer consistent with                                                                                         | As proposed      |
| --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ---------------- |
| si and i factors for proposed thermal ridges shall be determined in accordance with requirements in Section C402.1.4. |                  |
| Solar absorptance                                                                                                     | 0.75             |
| Emittance                                                                                                             | 0.0              |
| Type                                                                                                                  | mass wall        |
| Gross area                                                                                                            | same as proposed |

# Walls, below-grade

| -Factor | as specified in T C with insulation layer on interior side of walls |
| ------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------- |

# Type: oist/framed floor

As proposed

# Floors, above-grade

Gross area: same as proposed

-factor: as specified in T

As proposed

# Floors, slab-on-grade

Type: unheated

-factor: as specified in T

As proposed

# Opa ue doors

Type: swinging

Area: Same as proposed

-factor: as specified in T

As proposed

# Area

1. The proposed vertical fenestration area where the proposed vertical fenestration area is less than 40 percent of above-grade wall area. As proposed
2. 40 percent of above-grade wall area where the proposed vertical fenestration area is 40 percent or more of the above-grade wall area.

# Vertical fenestration other than opa ue doors

-factor: as specified in T

As proposed

# SHGC

SHGC: as specified in T except that for climates with no requirement (NR) SHGC 0.40 shall be used

# External shading and PF

none

# Area

1. The proposed skylight area where the proposed skylight area is less than that permitted by C. As proposed
2. The area permitted by C where the proposed skylight area exceeds that permitted by C.

# Skylights

-factor: as specified in T

As proposed
# SHGC

as specified in T C except that for climates with no requirement (NR) SHGC 0.40 shall be used.

# Lighting, interior

The interior lighting power shall be determined in accordance with C. Where the occupancy of the building is not known, the lighting power density shall be 1.0 watt per square foot based on the categorization of buildings with unknown space classification as offices.

# Lighting, exterior

The lighting power shall be determined in accordance with T C, C and C. Areas and dimensions of surfaces shall be the same as proposed.

# Internal gains

Receptacle, motor and process loads shall be modeled and estimated based on the space use classification. End-use load components within and associated with the building shall be modeled to include, but not be limited to, the following: exhaust fans, parking garage ventilation fans, exterior building lighting, swimming pool heaters and pumps, elevators, escalators, refrigeration equipment and cooking equipment.

# Schedules

Operating schedules shall include hourly profiles for daily operation and shall account for variations between weekdays, weekends, holidays and any seasonal operation. Schedules shall model the time-dependent variations in occupancy, illumination, receptacle loads, thermostat settings, mechanical ventilation, HVAC equipment availability, service hot water usage and any process loads. The schedules shall be typical of the proposed building type as determined by the designer and approved by the jurisdiction.
# Where the proposed design specifies mechanical ventilation:

1. For systems 1-4 as specified in Tables C407.4.1(2) and C407.4.1(3), the outdoor airflow rate shall be determined in accordance with Section C403.7 and International Mechanical Code Section 403.3.1.1.2.3.4 using a system ventilation efficiency (Ey) of 0.75. As proposed, in accordance with C.
2. For systems 5-11 as specified in Tables C407.4.1(2) and C407.4.1(3), the outdoor airflow rate shall be determined in accordance with Section C403.7 and International Mechanical Code Section 403.3.

# Where the proposed design specifies natural ventilation, as proposed.

| Fuel type:       | same as proposed design          |             |
| ---------------- | -------------------------------- | ----------- |
| Equipment typeᵃ: | as specified in T C and          | As proposed |
| Efficiency:      | as specified in the tables in C. |             |

# Heating systems

| Capacityᵇ: | sized proportionally to the capacities in the proposed design based on sizing runs, and shall be established such that no smaller number of unmet heating load hours and no larger heating capacity safety factors are provided than in the proposed design. |
| ---------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| Fuel type: | same as proposed design                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |

# Cooling systems

| Equipment typeᶜ: | as specified in T C and | As proposed |
| ---------------- | ----------------------- | ----------- |

# Efficiency

as specified in T

C, C and

As proposed

# Capacityᵇ

si ed proportionally to the capacities in the proposed design based on si ing runs, and shall be established such that no smaller number of unmet cooling load hours and no larger cooling capacity safety factors are provided than in the proposed design.

# Economi erᵈ

same as proposed, in accordance with

As proposed

# Fuel type

same as proposed

As proposed

For Group R, as proposed multiplied by SWHF.

For other than Group R, as proposed multiplied by efficiency as provided by the manufacturer of the DWHR unit.

# Service water heatingᵉ

Capacity: same as proposed

Where no service water hot water system exists or is specified in the proposed design, no service hot water heating shall be modeled.

# Energy Recovery

Where the proposed design specifies mechanical ventilation, as specified in Section C403.7.4 based on the standard reference design airflows.

As proposed

Where the proposed design specifies natural ventilation, as proposed.
As specified in Section C403.8 for the proposed design.

1. Where the fan power of the proposed design is exempted from the requirements of Section C403.8, as proposed.
2. Fan systems addressed by Section C403.8.1: Fan system HP power shall be as proposed or to the limits specified in Section C403.8.1, whichever is smaller. If the limit is reached, the power of each fan shall be reduced proportionally until the limit is met.
3. Fan systems serving areas where the mechanical ventilation is provided in accordance with an engineered ventilation system design of Section 403.2 of the International Mechanical Code shall not use the particulate filtration or air cleaner pressure drop adjustment available in Table C403.8(1) when calculating the fan system HP limit for the portion of the airflow being treated to comply with the engineered ventilation system design.
Where a system providing on-site renewable energy has been modeled in the proposed design the same system shall be modeled identically in the standard reference design except the rated capacity shall meet the requirements of Section C405.15.1.

Where no system is designed or included in the proposed design, model an unshaded photovoltaic system with the following characteristics:

- Rated capacity per Section C405.15.1
- T: Crystalline On-site Renewable Silicone Panel with glass cover, nominal efficiency and temperature coefficient of -0.35 / C, Performance shall be based on a reference temperature of 77 F (25 C), airmass of 1.5 atmosphere and irradiance of 317 BTU/h x ft² (1000 W/m²).
- T: Rack mounted array with installed nominal operating cell temperature (INOCT) of 103 F (45 C).
- Total System Losses (DC output to AC output): 11.3.
- T: 0-degrees (mounted horizontally).
- 180 degrees.

For SI: 1 watt per square foot = 10.7 w/m².

SWHF: Service Water Heat Recovery factor, DWHR: Drain Water Heat Recovery.

1. Where no heating system exists or has been specified, the heating system shall be modeled as fossil fuel. The system characteristics shall be identical in both the standard reference design and proposed design.
2. The ratio between the capacities used in the annual simulations and the capacities determined by sizing runs shall be the same for both the standard reference design and proposed design.
# Proposed Design

c. Where no cooling system exists or no cooling system has been specified, the cooling system shall be modeled as an air-cooled single- one system, one unit per thermal one. The system characteristics shall be identical in both the standard reference design and proposed design.

d. If an economizer is required in accordance with Table C403.5(1) and where no economizer exists or is specified in the proposed design, then a supply-air economizer shall be provided in the standard reference design in accordance with C.

e. The SWHF shall be applied as follows:

1. Where potable water from the DWHR unit supplies not less than one shower and not greater than two showers, of which the drain water from the same showers flows through the DWHR unit then SWHF 1 (DWHR unit efficiency 0.36).
2. Where potable water from the DWHR unit supplies not less than three showers and not greater than four showers, of which the drain water from the same showers flows through the DWHR unit then SWHF 1 (DWHR unit efficiency 0.33).
3. Where potable water from the DWHR unit supplies not less than five showers and not greater than six showers, of which the drain water from the same showers flows through the DWHR unit, then SWHF 1 (DWHR unit efficiency 0.26).
4. Where Items 1 through 3 are not met, SWHF 1.0.
# Current Page

| Type                | System 5    | System 6  | System 1  |
| ------------------- | ----------- | --------- | --------- |
| Water/ground        | Heat pump   | System 6  | System 6  |
|                     | Fossil fuel | System 7  | System 7  |
| Electric resistance | System 8    | System    | System 3  |
| Air/none            | Heat pump   | System 8  | System    |
|                     | Fossil fuel | System 10 | System 11 |

a. Select “water/ground” where the proposed design system condenser is water or evaporatively cooled; select “air/none” where the condenser is air cooled. Closed-circuit dry coolers shall be considered to be air cooled. Systems utilizing district cooling shall be treated as if the condenser water type were “water.” Where mechanical cooling is not specified or the mechanical cooling system in the proposed design does not require heat rejection, the system shall be treated as if the condenser water type were “Air.” For proposed designs with ground-source or groundwater-source heat pumps, the standard reference design HVAC system shall be water-source heat pump (System 6).

b. Select the path that corresponds to the proposed design heat source: electric resistance, heat pump (including air source and water source), or fuel fired. Systems utilizing district heating (steam or hot water) and systems without heating capability shall be treated as if the heating system type were “fossil fuel.” For systems with mixed fuel heating sources, the system or systems that use the secondary heating source type (the one with the smallest total installed output capacity for the spaces served by the system) shall be modeled identically in the standard reference design and the primary heating source type shall be used to determine standard reference design HVAC system type.

c. Select the standard reference design HVAC system category: The system under “single- one residential system” shall be selected where the HVAC system in the proposed design is a single- one system and serves a Group R occupancy. The system under “single- one nonresidential system” shall be selected where the HVAC system in the proposed design is a single- one system and serves other than Group R occupancy. The system under “all other” shall be selected for all other cases.
|    | T                                                             | C                | P CI IC TIO       | OR TH                          | T | R | R | R | C | IG | H | C | Y T |
| -- | ------------------------------------------------------------- | ---------------- | ----------------- | ------------------------------ | - | - | - | - | - | -- | - | - | --- |
| 1  | Variable air volume with parallel fan-powered boxesᵃ          | VAVᵈ             | Chilled waterᵉ    | Electric resistance            |   |   |   |   |   |    |   |   |     |
| 2  | Variable air volume with reheatᵇ                              | VAVᵈ             | Chilled waterᵉ    | Hot water fossil fuel boilerᶠ  |   |   |   |   |   |    |   |   |     |
| 3  | Packaged variable air volume with parallel fan-powered boxesᵃ | VAVᵈ             | Direct expansionᶜ | Electric resistance            |   |   |   |   |   |    |   |   |     |
| 4  | Packaged variable air volume with reheatᵇ                     | VAVᵈ             | Direct expansionᶜ | Hot water fossil fuel boilerᶠ  |   |   |   |   |   |    |   |   |     |
| 5  | Two-pipe fan coil                                             | Constanti volume | Chilled waterᵉ    | Electric resistance            |   |   |   |   |   |    |   |   |     |
| 6  | Water-source heat pump                                        | Constanti volume | Direct expansion  | Electric heat pump and boilerᵍ |   |   |   |   |   |    |   |   |     |
| 7  | Four-pipe fan coil                                            | Constanti volume | Chilled waterᵉ    | Hot water fossil fuel boilerᶠ  |   |   |   |   |   |    |   |   |     |
| 8  | Packaged terminal heat pump                                   | Constanti volume | Direct expansion  | Electric heat pumpʰ            |   |   |   |   |   |    |   |   |     |
|    | Packaged rooftop heat pump                                    | Constanti volume | Direct expansion  | Electric heat pumpʰ            |   |   |   |   |   |    |   |   |     |
| 10 | Packaged terminal air conditioner                             | Constant volumeⁱ | Direct expansion  | Hot water fossil fuel boilerᶠ  |   |   |   |   |   |    |   |   |     |
| 11 | Packaged rooftop air conditioner                              | Constant volumeⁱ | Direct expansion  | Fossil fuel furnace            |   |   |   |   |   |    |   |   |     |

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 cfm = 0.471 L/s, 1 tu/h = 0.23 W, C (F) = 32 / 1.8.

a. Fans in parallel VAV fan-powered boxes shall be sized for 50 percent of the peak design flow rate and shall be modeled with 0.35 W/cfm fan power. Minimum volume setpoints for fan-powered boxes shall be equal to the minimum rate for the space required for ventilation consistent with C, Item 3. Supply air temperature setpoint shall be constant at the design condition.

b. Minimum volume setpoints for VAV reheat boxes shall be 0.4 cfm/ft² of floor area. Supply air temperature shall be reset based on one demand from the design temperature difference to a 10 F temperature difference under minimum load conditions. Design airflow rates shall be sized for the reset supply air temperature i.e., a 10 F temperature difference.

c. The fuel type for the cooling system shall match that of the cooling system in the proposed design.

d. Where the proposed design system has a supply, return or relief fan motor 25 hp or larger, the corresponding fan in the VAV system of the standard reference design shall be modeled assuming a variable-speed drive. For smaller fans, a forward-curved centrifugal fan.
# e.

For systems using purchased chilled water, the chillers are not explicitly modeled and chilled water costs shall be based as determined in C and C. Otherwise, the standard reference design's chiller plant shall be modeled with chillers having the number as indicated in T C as a function of standard reference building chiller plant load and type as indicated in T C as a function of individual chiller load. Where chiller fuel source is mixed, the system in the standard reference design shall have chillers with the same fuel types and with capacities having the same proportional capacity as the proposed design's chillers for each fuel type. Chilled water supply temperature shall be modeled at 44 F design supply temperature and 56 F return temperature. Piping losses shall not be modeled in either building model. Chilled water supply water temperature shall be reset in accordance with C. Pump system power for each pumping system shall be the same as the proposed design; where the proposed design has no chilled water pumps, the standard reference design pump power shall be 22 W/gpm (equal to a pump operating against a 75-foot head, 65-percent combined impeller and motor efficiency). The chilled water system shall be modeled as primary-only variable flow with flow maintained at the design rate through each chiller using a bypass. Chilled water pumps shall be modeled as riding the pump curve or with variable-speed drives where required in C. The heat rejection device shall be an axial fan cooling tower with two-speed fans where required in C. Condenser water design supply temperature shall be 85 F or 10 F approach to design wet-bulb temperature, whichever is lower, with a design temperature rise of 10 F. The tower shall be controlled to maintain a 70 F leaving water temperature where weather permits, floating up to leaving water temperature at design conditions. Pump system power for each pumping system shall be the same as the proposed design; where the proposed design has no condenser water pumps, the standard reference design pump power shall be 1 W/gpm (equal to a pump operating against a 60-foot head, 60-percent combined impeller and motor efficiency). Each chiller shall be modeled with separate condenser water and chilled water pumps interlocked to operate with the associated chiller.

# f.

For systems using purchased hot water or steam, the boilers are not explicitly modeled and hot water or steam costs shall be based on actual utility rates. Otherwise, the boiler plant shall use the same fuel as the proposed design and shall be natural draft. The standard reference design boiler plant shall be modeled with a single boiler where the standard reference design plant load is 600,000 tu/h and less and with two equally sized boilers for plant capacities exceeding 600,000 tu/h. Boilers shall be staged as required by the load. Hot water supply temperature shall be modeled at 180 F design supply temperature and 130 F return temperature. Piping losses shall not be modeled in either building model. Hot water supply water temperature shall be reset in accordance with C. Pump system power for each pumping system shall be the same as the proposed design; where the proposed design has no hot water pumps, the standard reference design pump power shall be 1 W/gpm (equal to a pump operating against a 60-foot head, 60-percent combined impeller and motor efficiency). The hot water system shall be modeled as primary only with continuous variable flow. Hot water pumps shall be modeled as riding the pump curve or with variable speed drives where required by C.

# g.

Water-source heat pumps shall be connected to a common heat pump water loop controlled to maintain temperatures between 60 F and 80 F. Heat rejection from the loop shall be provided by an axial fan closed-circuit evaporative fluid cooler with two-speed fans where required in C. Heat addition to the loop shall be provided by a boiler that uses the same fuel as the proposed design and shall be natural.
draft. Where no boilers exist in the proposed design, the standard reference building boilers shall be fossil fuel. The standard reference design boiler plant shall be modeled with a single boiler where the standard reference design plant load is 600,000 tu/h or less and with two equally sized boilers for plant capacities exceeding 600,000 tu/h. Boilers shall be staged as required by the load. Piping losses shall not be modeled in either building model. Pump system power shall be the same as the proposed design; where the proposed design has no pumps, the standard reference design pump power shall be 22 W/gpm, which is equal to a pump operating against a 75-foot head, with a 65-percent combined impeller and motor efficiency. Loop flow shall be variable with flow shutoff at each heat pump when its compressor cycles off as required by C. Loop pumps shall be modeled as riding the pump curve or with variable speed drives where required by C.

# h.

Electric air-source heat pumps shall be modeled with electric auxiliary heat. The system shall be controlled with a multistage space thermostat and an outdoor air thermostat wired to energize auxiliary heat only on the last thermostat stage and when outdoor air temperature is less than 40 F.

# i.

Fans shall be controlled in the same manner as in the proposed design i.e., fan operation whenever the space is occupied or fan operation cycled on calls for heating and cooling. Where the fan is modeled as cycling and the fan energy is included in the energy efficiency rating of the equipment, fan energy shall not be modeled explicitly.
# T C R O CHI R

# TOT CHI R P T

# C P CITY

| 300 tons           | 1                                                                                             |
| ------------------ | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| 300 tons, 600 tons | 2, si ed e ually                                                                              |
| 600 tons           | 2 minimum, with chillers added so that all are si ed e ually and none is larger than 800 tons |

For SI: 1 ton 3517 W.
# CHILLER TYPE

| 100 tons           | Reciprocating | Single-effect absorption, direct fired |
| ------------------ | ------------- | -------------------------------------- |
| 100 tons, 300 tons | Screw         | Double-effect absorption, direct fired |
| 300 tons           | Centrifugal   | Double-effect absorption, direct fired |

For SI: 1 ton = 3517 W.

The standard reference design and proposed design shall be analyzed using identical thermal blocks as specified in C, C or C.

# HVAC ZONES

Where HVAC zones are defined on HVAC design drawings, each HVAC zone shall be modeled as a separate thermal block. Different HVAC zones shall be allowed to be combined to create a single thermal block or identical thermal blocks to which multipliers are applied, provided that:

1. The space use classification is the same throughout the thermal block.
2. All HVAC zones in the thermal block that are adjacent to glazed exterior walls face the same orientation or their orientations are within 45 degrees (0.7 rad) of each other.
3. All of the zones are served by the same HVAC system or by the same kind of HVAC system.

# THERMAL BLOCKS

Where HVAC zones have not yet been designed, thermal blocks shall be defined based on similar internal load densities, occupancy, lighting, thermal and temperature schedules, and in combination with the following guidelines:

1. Separate thermal blocks shall be assumed for interior and perimeter spaces. Interior spaces shall be those located more than 15 feet (4572 mm) from an exterior wall. Perimeter spaces shall be those located closer than 15 feet (4572 mm) from an exterior wall.
2. Separate thermal blocks shall be assumed for spaces adjacent to glazed exterior walls: a separate block shall be provided for each orientation, except orientations that differ by not more than 45 degrees (0.7 rad) shall be permitted to be considered to be the same orientation. Each block shall include floor area that is 15.
feet (4572 mm) or less from a glazed perimeter wall, except that floor area within 15 feet (4572 mm) of glazed perimeter walls having more than one orientation shall be divided proportionately between ones.

1. Separate thermal blocks shall be assumed for spaces having floors that are in contact with the ground or exposed to ambient conditions from ones that do not share these features.
2. Separate thermal blocks shall be assumed for spaces having exterior ceiling or roof assemblies from ones that do not share these features.

Group R-2 occupancy spaces shall be modeled using one thermal block per space except that those facing the same orientations are permitted to be combined into one thermal block. Corner units and units with roof or floor loads shall only be combined with units sharing these features.

Calculation procedures used to comply with this section shall be software tools capable of calculating the annual energy consumption of all building elements that differ between the standard reference design and the proposed design and shall include the following capabilities:

1. Building operation for a full calendar year (8,760 hours).
2. Climate data for a full calendar year (8,760 hours) and shall reflect approved coincident hourly data for temperature, solar radiation, humidity and wind speed for the building location.
3. Ten or more thermal zones.
4. Thermal mass effects.
5. Hourly variations in occupancy, illumination, receptacle loads, thermostat settings, mechanical ventilation, HVAC equipment availability, service hot water usage and any process loads.
6. Part-load performance curves for mechanical equipment.
7. Capacity and efficiency correction curves for mechanical heating and cooling equipment.
8. Printed code official inspection checklist listing each of the proposed design component characteristics from T C determined by the analysis to provide compliance, along with their respective performance ratings, including but not limited to U value, R factor, SHGC, HSPF, AFUE, SEER and EF.

Performance analysis tools complying with the applicable subsections of C and tested according to HR shall be permitted to be approved. Tools are permitted to be approved based on meeting a specified threshold for a jurisdiction. The code official shall be permitted to approve tools for a specified application or limited scope.

Where calculations require input values not specified by C, C, C and C, those input values shall be taken from an approved source.
Where the simulation program does not model a design, material or device of the proposed design, an exceptional calculation method shall be used where approved by the code official. Where there are multiple designs, materials or devices that the simulation program does not model, each shall be calculated separately and exceptional savings determined for each. The total exceptional savings shall not constitute more than half of the difference between the baseline simulated building performance and the proposed simulated building performance. Applications for approval of an exceptional method shall include all of the following:

1. Step-by-step documentation of the exceptional calculation method performed, detailed enough to reproduce the results.
2. Copies of all spreadsheets used to perform the calculations.
3. A sensitivity analysis of energy consumption where each of the input parameters is varied from half to double the value assumed.
4. The calculations shall be performed on a time step basis consistent with the simulation program used.
5. The performance rating calculated with and without the exceptional calculation method.

# CTIO C I T C I OR TIO

# Y T CO I IO I G

# CTIO C

# I T C I OR TIO

# Y T CO I IO I G

This section covers the provision of maintenance information and the commissioning of, and the functional testing requirements for, building systems.

The building operations and maintenance documents shall be provided to the owner and shall consist of manufacturers information, specifications and recommendations, programming procedures and data points, narratives and other means of illustrating to the owner how the building, equipment and systems are intended to be installed, maintained and operated. Required regular maintenance actions for equipment and systems shall be clearly stated on a readily visible label. The label shall include the title or publication number for the operation and maintenance manual for that particular model and type of product.

Prior to the final mechanical and plumbing inspections, the registered design professional or approved agency shall provide evidence of mechanical systems.
issioning and completion in accordance with the provisions of this section. Construction document notes shall clearly indicate provisions for commissioning and completion requirements in accordance with this section and are permitted to refer to specifications for further requirements. Copies of all documentation shall be given to the owner or owner's authorized agent and made available to the code official upon request in accordance with C and C.

# The following systems are exempt:

1. Buildings with less than 10,000 square feet (2 m²) and combined heating, cooling, and service water-heating capacity of less than 60,000 BTU/h (280kW).
2. Systems included in C that serve individual dwelling units and sleeping units.

# A commissioning plan shall be developed by a registered design professional or approved agency and shall include the following items:

1. A narrative description of the activities that will be accomplished during each phase of commissioning including the personnel intended to accomplish each of the activities.
2. A listing of the specific equipment, appliances or systems to be tested and a description of the tests to be performed.
3. Functions to be tested including, but not limited to, calibrations and economizer controls.
4. Conditions under which the test will be performed. Testing shall affirm winter and summer design conditions and full outside air conditions.
5. Measurable criteria for performance.

# HVAC systems shall be balanced in accordance with generally accepted engineering standards.

Air and water flow rates shall be measured and adjusted to deliver final flow rates within the tolerances provided in the product specifications. Test and balance activities shall include air system and hydronic system balancing.

# Each supply air outlet and one terminal device shall be equipped with means for air balancing in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 6 of the International Mechanical Code.

Discharge dampers used for air-system balancing are prohibited on constant-volume fans and variable volume fans with motors 10 hp (18.6 kW) and larger. Air systems shall be balanced in a manner to first minimize throttling losses then, for fans with system power of greater than 1 hp (0.746 kW), fan speed shall be adjusted to meet design flow conditions.

Fans with fan motors of 1 hp (0.74 kW) or less are not required to be provided with a means for air balancing.

# Individual hydronic heating and cooling coils
shall be equipped with means for balancing and measuring flow. Hydronic systems shall be proportionately balanced in a manner to first minimize throttling losses, then the pump impeller shall be trimmed or pump speed shall be adjusted to meet design flow conditions. Each hydronic system shall have either the capability to measure pressure across the pump, or test ports at each side of each pump.

The following equipment is not required to be equipped with a means for balancing or measuring flow:

1. Pumps with pump motors of 5 hp (3.7 kW) or less.
2. Where throttling results in not greater than 5 percent of the nameplate horsepower draw above that required if the impeller were trimmed.

# C

Functional performance testing specified in C through C shall be conducted.

Equipment functional performance testing shall demonstrate the installation and operation of components, systems and system-to-system interfacing relationships in accordance with approved plans and specifications such that operation, function and maintenance serviceability for each of the commissioned systems are confirmed. Testing shall include all modes and sequence of operation, including under full-load, part-load and the following emergency conditions:

1. All modes as described in the sequence of operation.
2. Redundant or automatic back-up mode.
3. Performance of alarms.
4. Mode of operation upon a loss of power and restoration of power.

Unitary or packaged HVAC equipment listed in the tables in C that do not require supply air economizers.

# C

# C

HVAC and service water-heating control systems shall be tested to document that control devices, components, equipment and systems are calibrated and adjusted and operate in accordance with approved plans and specifications. Sequences of operation shall be functionally tested to document they operate in accordance with approved plans and specifications.

Air economizers shall undergo a functional test to determine that they operate in accordance with manufacturer’s specifications.

# C

# P

A preliminary report of commissioning test
Procedures and results shall be completed and certified by the registered design professional or approved agency and provided to the building owner or owner's authorized agent. The report shall be organized with mechanical and service hot water findings in separate sections to allow independent review. The report shall be identified as “Preliminary Commissioning Report,” shall include the completed Commissioning Compliance Checklist, C, and shall identify:

1. Itemization of deficiencies found during testing required by this section that have not been corrected at the time of report preparation.
2. Deferred tests that cannot be performed at the time of report preparation because of climatic conditions.
3. Climatic conditions required for performance of the deferred tests.
4. Results of functional performance tests.
5. Functional performance test procedures used during the commissioning process, including measurable criteria for test acceptance.
# IG R C

# CO I IO I G CO P I C CH C I T

Buildings, or portions thereof, shall not be considered as acceptable for a final inspection pursuant to the code until the code official has received the Preliminary Commissioning Report from the building owner or owner's authorized agent.

The code official shall be permitted to require that a copy of the Preliminary Commissioning Report be made available for review by the code official.

The construction documents shall specify that the documents described in this section be provided to the building owner or owner's authorized agent within 30 days of the date of receipt of the certificate of occupancy.

A written report describing the activities and measurements completed in accordance with the code.

A report of test procedures and results identified as “Final Commissioning Report” shall be delivered to the building owner or owner's authorized agent. The report shall be organized with mechanical system and service hot water system findings in separate sections to allow independent review. The report shall include the following:

1. Results of functional performance tests.
2. Disposition of deficiencies found during testing, including details of corrective measures used or proposed.
3. Functional performance test procedures used during the commissioning process including measurable criteria for test acceptance, provided herein for repeatability.

Deferred tests that cannot be performed at the time of report preparation due to climatic conditions.

Automatic lighting controls required by this code shall comply with this section.
Prior to passing final inspection, the registered design professional or approved agency shall provide evidence that the lighting control systems have been tested to ensure that control hardware and software are calibrated, adjusted, programmed and in proper working condition in accordance with the construction documents and manufacturer's instructions. Functional testing shall be in accordance with C through C for the applicable control type.

# C O

Where occupant sensor controls are provided, the following procedures shall be performed:

1. Certify that the occupant sensor has been located and aimed in accordance with manufacturer recommendations.
2. For projects with seven or fewer occupant sensors, each sensor shall be tested.
3. For projects with more than seven occupant sensors, testing shall be done for each unique combination of sensor type and space geometry. Where multiples of each unique combination of sensor type and space geometry are provided, not less than 10 percent and in no case fewer than one, of each combination shall be tested unless the code official or design professional requires a higher percentage to be tested. Where 30 percent or more of the tested controls fail, all remaining identical combinations shall be tested.

For occupant sensor controls to be tested, verify the following:

1. Where occupant sensor controls include status indicators, verify correct operation.
2. The controlled lights turn off or down to the permitted level within the required time.
3. For auto-on occupant sensor controls, the lights turn on to the permitted level when an occupant enters the space.
4. For manual-on occupant sensor controls, the lights turn on only when manually activated.
5. The lights are not incorrectly turned on by movement in adjacent areas or by HVAC operation.

# C T

Where time switch controls are provided, the following procedures shall be performed:

1. Confirm that the time switch control is programmed with accurate weekday, weekend and holiday schedules.
2. Provide documentation to the owner of time switch controls programming including weekday, weekend, holiday schedules, and set-up and preference program settings.
3. Verify the correct time and date in the time switch.
4. Verify that any battery back-up is installed and energized.
5. Verify that the override time limit is set to not more than 2 hours.
6. Simulate occupied condition. Verify and document the following:
# 7. Simulate unoccupied condition. Verify and document the following:

- 7.1. Nonexempt lighting turns off.
- 7.2. Annual override switch allows only the lights in the enclosed space where the override switch is located to turn on or remain on until the next scheduled shutoff occurs.

# 8. Additional testing as specified by the registered design professional

Where daylight responsive controls are provided, the following shall be verified:

1. Control devices have been properly located, field calibrated and set for accurate setpoints and threshold light levels.
2. Daylight controlled lighting loads adjust to light level setpoints in response to available daylight.
3. The calibration adjustment equipment is located for ready access only by authorized personnel.

# Where lighting controls are configured for high-end trims, verify the following:

1. That high-end trim has been set.
2. That the calibration adjustment equipment is located for ready access only by authorized personnel.
3. That lighting controls with ready access for users cannot increase the lighting power above the maximum level established by the high-end trim controls.

The construction documents shall specify that the documents described in this section be provided to the building owner or owner's authorized agent within 10 days of the date of receipt of the certificate of occupancy.

Construction documents shall include the location and catalogue number of each piece of equipment.

An operating and maintenance manual shall be provided and include the following:

1. Name and address of not less than one service agency for installed equipment.
2. A narrative of how each system is intended to operate, including recommended setpoints.
3. Submittal data indicating all selected options for each piece of lighting equipment and lighting controls.
# 4. Operation and maintenance manuals for each piece of lighting equipment. Required routine maintenance actions, cleaning and recommended relamping shall be clearly identified.

# 5. A schedule for inspecting and recalibrating all lighting controls.

A report of test results shall be provided and include the following:

1. Results of functional performance tests.
2. Disposition of deficiencies found during testing, including details of corrective measures used or proposed.

# Section 40 establishes criteria for demonstrating compliance with the requirements of C403.1.1, HVAC total system performance ratio (HVAC TSPR)

Section C40 applies to new HVAC systems that serve buildings in Section C403.1.3.1 and are not excluded from using HVAC TSPR by Section C403.1.3. All applicable HVAC systems shall comply with Section C40.

Where the building permit applies to only a portion of the HVAC system in a building and the remaining components will be designed under a future building permit or were previously installed, the future or previously installed components shall be modeled as follows:

1. Where the HVAC zones that do not include HVAC systems in the current permit will be or are served by independent systems, then the block including those zones shall not be included in the model.
2. Where the HVAC zones that do not include complete HVAC systems in the permit are intended to receive HVAC services from systems in the permit, their proposed zonal systems shall be modeled with equipment that meets, but does not exceed, the requirements of Section C403.
3. Where the zone equipment in the permit receives HVAC services from previously installed systems that are not in the permit, the previously installed systems shall be modeled with equipment matching the certified value of what is installed or equipment that meets the requirements of Section C403.
# 4. Where the central plant heating and cooling equipment is completely replaced and HVAC systems with existing systems receive HVAC services from systems in the permit, their proposed operational systems shall be modeled with equipment that meets, but does not exceed, the requirements of Section C403.

# C H C T PR C

# C H C T PR C

Systems allowed to use HVAC TSPR in accordance with Section C403.1.3 shall comply with all of the following:

1. Systems shall meet the applicable provisions of Section C403.1.3.3 and Sections within Section C403 that are listed in Table C407.2
2. The HVAC TSPR of the proposed design shall be greater than or equal to the HVAC TSPR of the standard reference design divided by the mechanical performance factor (PF) using Equation 4-33.

| TSPRp                                                                                           | HVAC TSPR of the proposed design calculated in accordance with Sections C40.4, C40.5 and C40.6.              |
| ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| TSPRr                                                                                           | HVAC TSPR of the reference building design calculated in accordance with Sections C40.4, C40.5 and C40.6.    |
| PF                                                                                              | Mechanical Performance Factor from Table C40.4 based on climate zone and building use type                   |
| Where a building has multiple building use types, PF shall be area weighted using Equation 4-34 |                                                                                                              |
| PF1, PF2 through PFn                                                                            | Mechanical Performance Factors from Table C40.4 based on climate zone and building use types 1, 2, through n |
| A1, A2 through An                                                                               | Conditioned floor areas for building use types 1, 2, through n                                               |

# Climate

| Building Group Type            | Occupancy | 0A   | 0     | 1A   | 1     | 2A    | 2    | 3A   | 3    | 3C    | 4A    | 4    | 4C   | 5A    | 5     | 5C    | 6A    | 6     | 7     | 8    |
| ------------------------------ | --------- | ---- | ----- | ---- | ----- | ----- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ----- | ----- | ---- | ---- | ----- | ----- | ----- | ----- | ----- | ----- | ---- |
| Office (small and medium)ᵃ     |           | 0.72 | 0.715 | 0.70 | 0.705 | 0.685 | 0.65 | 0.71 | 0.68 | 0.645 | 0.805 | 0.70 | 0.78 | 0.845 | 0.765 | 0.805 | 0.865 | 0.835 | 0.875 | 0.85 |
| Officeₐ (Large)                |           | 0.83 | 0.83  | 0.84 | 0.84  | 0.7   | 0.82 | 0.72 | 0.81 | 0.77  | 0.67  | 0.76 | 0.63 | 0.71  | 0.72  | 0.63  | 0.73  | 0.71  | 0.71  | 0.71 |
| Retail                         |           | 0.60 | 0.57  | 0.50 | 0.55  | 0.46  | 0.46 | 0.43 | 0.51 | 0.40  | 0.45  | 0.57 | 0.68 | 0.46  | 0.68  | 0.67  | 0.50  | 0.45  | 0.44  | 0.38 |
| Hotel/Multifamily/Dormitory    | R-1       | 0.62 | 0.62  | 0.63 | 0.63  | 0.62  | 0.68 | 0.61 | 0.71 | 0.73  | 0.45  | 0.5  | 0.52 | 0.38  | 0.47  | 0.51  | 0.35  | 0.38  | 0.31  | 0.26 |
| School/Education and Libraries | E (A-3)   | 0.82 | 0.81  | 0.80 | 0.7   | 0.75  | 0.72 | 0.71 | 0.72 | 0.67  | 0.73  | 0.72 | 0.68 | 0.82  | 0.73  | 0.61  | 0.8   | 0.80  | 0.83  | 0.77 |

a. Large office gross conditioned floor area 150,000 ft² (14,000 m²) or 5 floors; all other offices are small or medium.

HVAC TSPR is calculated according to Equation 4-35.

Building HVAC system energy: Sum of the annual site energy consumption for heating, cooling, fans, energy recovery, pumps, and heat rejection in thousands of tus.

Heating and cooling load: Sum of the annual heating and cooling loads met by the building HVAC system in thousands of tus.

Projects shall comply with the requirements of this Section when calculating compliance using HVAC Total System Performance Ratio.

Simulation tools used to calculate HVAC TSPR of the Standard Reference Design shall comply with the following:

1. The simulation program shall calculate the HVAC TSPR based only on the input for the proposed design and the requirements of Section 40. The calculation procedure shall not allow the user to directly modify the building component characteristics of the standard reference design.
2. Performance analysis tools meeting the applicable subsections of Section 40 and tested according to ASHRAE Standard 140, except for Sections 7 and 8 of Standard 140, shall be permitted to be approved. The required tests shall include building thermal envelope and fabric load test (Sections 5.2.1, 5.2.2, and 5.2.3), ground coupled slab-on-grade analytical verification tests (Section 5.2.4), space-cooling equipment performance tests (Section 5.3), space-heating equipment performance tests (Section 5.4), and air-side HVAC equipment analytical verification test (Section 5.5), along with the associated reporting (Section 6). Tools are permitted to be approved based on meeting a specified threshold for a jurisdiction. The code official shall be permitted to approve tools for a specified application or limited scope.
3. The test results and modeler reports shall be posted on a publicly available website and shall include the test results of the simulation programs and input files used for generating the results along with the results of the other simulation programs included in ASHRAE Standard 140 Annexes 8 and 16. The modeler report in Standard 140 Annex A2 Attachment A2.7 shall be completed for results exceeding the maximum or falling below the minimum of the reference values and for omitted results.
4. The simulation program shall have the ability to explicitly model part-load performance curves or other part-load adjustment methods based on manufacturer's part-load performance data for mechanical equipment.

The simulation program shall perform the simulation using hourly values of climatic data, such as...
temperature and humidity, using T Y3 data for the site as specified here: https://buildingenergyscore.energy.gov/resources

Documentation conforming to the provisions of this section shall be provided to the code official.

Building permit submittals shall include:

1. A report produced by the simulation software that includes the following:
1. Address of the building.
2. Name of individual completing the compliance report.
3. Name and version of the compliance software tool.
4. The dimensions, floor heights and number of floors for each block.
5. By block, the U-factor, C-factor, or F-factor for each simulated opaque envelope component and the U-factor and SHGC for each fenestration component.
6. By block or by surface for each block, the fenestration area.
7. By block, a list of the HVAC equipment simulated in the proposed design including the equipment type, fuel type, equipment efficiencies and system controls.
8. Annual site HVAC energy use by end use for the proposed and baseline building.
9. Annual sum of heating and cooling loads for the baseline building.
10. The HVAC total system performance ratio for both the standard reference design and the proposed design.
2. A mapping of the actual building HVAC component characteristics and those simulated in the proposed design showing how individual pieces of HVAC equipment identified above have been combined into average inputs as required by Section C40.6.1.10 including:
1. Fans
2. Hydronic pumps
3. Air handlers
4. Packaged cooling equipment
5. Furnaces
6. Heat pumps
7. Boilers
8. Chillers
9. Heat rejection equipment (open and closed-circuit cooling towers, dry coolers)
10. Electric resistance coils
11. Condensing units
12. Motors for fans and pumps
13. Energy recovery devices
3. For each piece of equipment identified above include the following as applicable:
1. Equipment name or tag consistent with that found on the design documents.
2. Rated Efficiency level.
3. Rated Capacity.
4. Where not provided by the simulation program report in item a, documentation of the calculation of any weighted equipment efficiencies input into the program.
5. Electrical input power for fans and pumps (before any speed or frequency control device) at design condition and calculation of input value (W/cfm or W/gpm).
4. Floor plan of the building identifying:
1. How portions of the buildings are assigned to the simulated blocks.
2. Areas of the building that are not covered under the requirements of Section C403.1.1.

Except as specified by this Section, the standard reference design and proposed design shall be configured and analyzed using identical methods and techniques.

The proposed design shall be configured and analyzed as specified in this section.

The geometry of buildings shall be configured using one or more blocks. Each block shall define attributes including block dimensions, number of floors, floor to floor height and floor to ceiling height. Simulation software may allow the use of simplified shapes (such as rectangle, L shape, H Shape, U shape or T shape) to represent blocks. Where actual building shape does not match these pre-defined shapes, simplifications are permitted providing the following requirements are met:

1. The conditioned floor area and volume of each block shall match the proposed design within 10 percent.
2. The area of each exterior envelope component from Table C402.1.4 is accounted for within 10 percent of the actual design.
3. The area of vertical fenestration and skylights is accounted for within 10 percent of the actual design.
# 4.

The orientation of each component in 2 and 3 above is accounted for within 45 degrees of the actual design. The creation of additional blocks may be necessary to meet these requirements. A more complex zoning of the building shall be allowed where all thermal zones in the reference and proposed model are the same and rules related to block geometry and HVAC system assignment to blocks are met with appropriate assignment to thermal zones.

Portions of the building that are unconditioned or served by systems not covered by the requirements of Section C403.1.1 shall be omitted.

# C

# C

One or more blocks may be required per building based on the following restrictions:

1. Each block can have only one occupancy type (multifamily dwelling unit, multifamily common area, office, library, education, hotel/motel or retail). Therefore, at least one single block shall be created for each unique use type.
2. Each block can be served by only one type of HVAC system. Therefore, a single block shall be created for each unique HVAC system and use type combination. Multiple HVAC units of the same type may be represented in one block. Table D601.10.2 provides directions for combining multiple HVAC units or components of the same type into a single block.
3. Each block can have a single definition of floor to floor or floor to ceiling heights. Where floor heights differ by more than two feet, unique blocks should be created for the floors with varying heights.
4. Each block can include either above grade or below grade floors. For buildings with both above grade and below grade floors, separate blocks should be created for each. For buildings with floors partially above grade and partially below grade, if the total wall area of the floor(s) in consideration is greater than or equal to 50 percent above grade, then it should be simulated as a completely above grade block, otherwise it should be simulated as a below grade block.
5. Each wall on a facade of a block shall have similar vertical fenestration. The product of the proposed design U-factor times the area of windows (UA) on each facade of a given floor cannot differ by more than 15 percent of the average UA for that facade in each block. The product of the proposed design SHGC times the area of windows (SHGCA) on each facade of a given floor cannot differ by more than 15 percent of the average SHGCA for that facade in each block. If either of these conditions are not met, additional blocks shall be created consisting of floors with similar fenestration.
6. For a building model with multiple blocks, the blocks should be configured together to have the same adjacencies as the actual building design.

# C

# T

Each floor in a block shall be modeled as a single thermal zone or as five thermal zones consisting of four perimeter zones and a core zone. Below grade floors shall be modeled as a single thermal block. If any facade in the block is less than 45 feet in length, there shall only be a single thermal zone per floor. Otherwise each floor shall be modeled with five thermal zones. A perimeter zone shall be created extending from each facade to a depth of 15 feet. Where facades intersect, the zone boundary shall be formed by a 45 degree angle with the two facades. The remaining area of each floor shall be modeled as a core zone with no exterior walls.

# C

# O

Building occupancies modeled in the standard reference design and the proposed design shall comply with the following requirements.

# C

# O

# T

# C

# O

The occupancy type for each block shall be consistent with the building area type as determined in accordance with Section C405.4.2.1. Portions of the building that are building area types other than multifamily dwelling unit, multifamily common area, office, school (education), library, or retail shall not be included in the simulation. Surfaces adjacent to such building portions shall be modeled as adiabatic in the simulation program.

# C

# O

# C

The occupant density, heat gain, and schedule shall be for multifamily, office, retail, library, hotel/motel or school as specified by ASHRAE Standard 90.1 Normative Appendix C.

# C

# C

Building envelope components modeled in the standard reference design and the proposed design shall comply with the requirements of this Section.

# C

# R

# C

# R

Roofs will be modeled with insulation above a steel roof deck. The roof U-factor and area shall be modeled as in the proposed design. If different roof thermal properties are present in a single block, an area weighted U-factor shall be used. Roof solar absorptance shall be modeled at 0.70 and emittance at 0.90.
Walls will be modeled as steel frame construction. The U-factor and area of above grade walls shall be modeled as in the proposed design. If different wall constructions exist on the façade of a block an area-weighted U-factor shall be used.

The C-factor and area of below grade walls shall be modeled as in the proposed design. If different slab on grade floor constructions exist in a block, an area-weighted C-factor shall be used.

Exterior floors shall be modeled as steel frame. The U-factor and area of floors shall be modeled as in the proposed design. If different wall constructions exist in the block an area-weighted U-factor shall be used.

The F-factor and area of slab on grade floors shall be modeled as in the proposed design. If different below grade wall constructions exist in a block, an area-weighted F-factor shall be used.

The window area and area weighted U-factor and SHGC shall be modeled for each façade based on the proposed design. Each exterior surface in a block must comply with Section C40.6.1.1.1 item 5. Windows will be combined into a single window centered on each façade based on the area and sill height input by the user. When different U values, SHGC or sill heights exist on a single facade, area weighted average for each shall be input by the user.

The skylight area and area weighted U-factor and SHGC shall be modeled for each floor based on the proposed design. Skylights will be combined into a single skylight centered on the roof of each one based on the area input by the user.

Permanent window overhangs shall be modeled. When windows with and without overhangs or windows with different overhang projection factors exist on a façade, window width weighted projection factors shall be input by the user as follows:

Interior lighting power density shall be equal to the allowance in Table C405.4.2(1) for multifamily, office, retail, library, or school. The lighting schedule shall be for multifamily, office, retail, library, or school as specified by ASHRAE Standard 0.1 Normative Appendix C. The impact of lighting controls is assumed to be captured by the lighting schedule and no explicit controls shall be modeled. Exterior lighting shall not be modeled.

The miscellaneous equipment schedule and power shall be for multifamily, office, retail, library, or school as specified by ASHRAE Standard 0.1 Normative Appendix C. The impact of miscellaneous equipment controls is assumed to be captured by the equipment schedule and no explicit controls shall be modeled.

1. Multifamily dwelling units shall have a miscellaneous load density of 0.42 W/ft²
2. Multifamily common areas shall have a miscellaneous load density of 0 W/ft²
Elevators shall not be modeled.

Service water heating shall not be modeled.

On-site Renewable Energy Systems shall not be modeled.

# HVAC Systems

HVAC systems shall meet the requirements of Section C403 Mechanical Systems.

At a minimum, the HVAC systems shown in Table CD105.2.10.1 shall be supported by the simulation program.
# PROPOSED HVAC SYSTEMS

| System No. | System Name                                                                                                         |
| ---------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| 1          | Packaged Terminal Air Conditioner (with electric or hydronic heat)                                                  |
| 2          | Packaged Terminal Air Heat Pump                                                                                     |
| 3          | Packaged Single Zone Gas Furnacea and/or air-cooled Air Conditioner (includes split systemsb)                       |
| 4          | Packaged Single Zone Heat Pump (air to air only)(includes split systemsb and electric or gas supplemental heat)     |
| 5          | Variable Refrigerant Flow (air cooled only)                                                                         |
| 6          | Variable Refrigerant Flow (air cooled only)                                                                         |
| 7          | Water Source Heat Pump (Water Loop), water-source variable refrigerant flow system, or water-source air conditioner |
| 8          | Ground Source Heat Pump                                                                                             |
| 9          | Packaged Variable Air Volume (D cooling)a                                                                           |
| 10         | Variable Air Volume (hydronic cooling)a                                                                             |
| 11         | Variable Air Volume with Fan Powered Terminal Units                                                                 |
| 12         | Dedicated Outdoor Air System (in conjunction with systems 1-8)                                                      |

a Reheat or primary heat may be electric, hydronic, or gas furnace

b Condensing units with ducted air handlers are modeled as package furnace with air conditioners or heat pumps

The HVAC systems shall be modeled as in the proposed design at design conditions unless otherwise stated with clarifications and simplifications as described in Tables C40.6.1.10.2(1) and C40.6.1.10.2(2). System parameters not described in the following sections shall be simulated to meet the minimum requirements of Section C403. All zones within a block shall be served by the same HVAC system type as described in Section C40.6.1.1.1 item 2. Heat loss from ducts and pipes shall not be modeled.

Table C40.6.1.10.2(1) Proposed Building System Parameters are based on input of full-load equipment efficiencies with adjustment using part-load curves integrated in the simulation program. Where other approaches to part-load adjustment are used, it is permitted for specific input parameters to vary. The simulation program shall model part-load HVAC equipment performance using either:

1. Full-load efficiency adjusted for fan power input that is modeled separately and typical part-load performance adjustments for the proposed equipment.
2. Part-load adjustments based on input of both full-load and part-load metrics, or
3. Equipment-specific adjustments based on performance data provided by the manufacturer.
e uipment manufacturer for the proposed e uipment.

Where multiple system components serve a block, average values weighed by the appropriate metric as described in this section shall be used.

1. Where multiple fan systems serve a single block, fan power shall be based on weighted average using the design supply air cfm.
2. Where multiple cooling systems serve a single block, COP shall be based on a weighted average using cooling capacity. D coils shall be entered as multi-stage if more than 50 percent of coil capacity serving the block is multi-stage with staged controls.
3. Where multiple heating systems serve a single block, thermal efficiency or heating COP shall be based on a weighted average using heating capacity.
4. Where multiple boilers or chillers serve a heating water or chilled water loop, efficiency shall be based on a weighted average for using heating or cooling capacity.
5. When multiple cooling towers serving a condenser water loop are combined, the cooling tower efficiency, cooling tower design approach and design range are based on a weighted average of the design water flow rate through each cooling tower.
6. Where multiple pumps serve a heating water, chilled water or condenser water loop, pump power shall be based on a weighted average for using design water flow rate.
7. When multiple system types with and without economizers are combined, the economizer maximum outside air fraction of the combined system shall be based on weighted average of 100 percent supply air for systems with economizers and design outdoor air for systems without economizers.
8. Multiple systems with and without ERVs cannot be combined.
9. Systems with and without supply air temperature reset cannot be combined.
10. Systems with different fan control (constant volume, multi-speed or VAV) for supply fans cannot be combined.
# PROPO I I G Y T P R T R

| Category                                       | Parameter                                                  | Fixed or User Defined                                                                                                                                                                                                           | Required                                                                          | Applicable Systems |
| ---------------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------ |
| HVAC                                           | System Type                                                | User Defined                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Selected from Table C40.6.1.10.1                                                  | All                |
| Design Day Information                         | Heating Design                                             | Fixed                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | 6 heating design and 1 dry-bulb and 1 wet-bulb cooling design                     | All                |
| Cooling Design                                 | Fixed                                                      | 6 heating design and 1 dry-bulb and 1 wet-bulb cooling design                                                                                                                                                                   | All                                                                               |                    |
| System Sizing                                  | One Coil Capacity                                          | Fixed                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | Sizing factors used are 1.25 for heating equipment and 1.15 for cooling equipment | All                |
| Supply Airflow                                 | Fixed                                                      | Based on a supply-air-to-room-air temperature set-point difference of 20 F (11.11 C) or equal to required outdoor air ventilation                                                                                               | 1-11                                                                              |                    |
| Portion of supply air with proposed Filter ERV | Percentage of supply air flow subject to higher filtration | User Defined                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Adjusts baseline Fan Power higher. Prorated                                       | All                |
| Outdoor Ventilation Air Flow Rate              | Fixed                                                      | As specified in ASHRAE Standard 0.1 Normative Appendix C, adjusted for proposed DCV control                                                                                                                                     | All                                                                               |                    |
| Outdoor Ventilation Supply Air Flow Rate       | Fixed                                                      | Based on ASHRAE Standard 62.1 Section 6.2.4.3 System Ventilation Efficiency (Evs) is 0.75                                                                                                                                       | -11                                                                               |                    |
| Adjustments                                    | Fixed                                                      | Basis is 1.0 one Air Distribution Effectiveness                                                                                                                                                                                 | All                                                                               |                    |
| Space temperature set points                   | Fixed                                                      | As specified in ASHRAE Standard 0.1 Normative Appendix C, except multifamily which shall use 68 F (20 C) heating and 76 F (24.4 C) cooling setpoints. Hotel/motel that shall be 70 F (21.1 C) heating and 72 F (22.2 C) cooling | 1-11                                                                              |                    |
| System Operation                               | Fan Operation                                              | User Defined                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Runs continuously during occupied hours or cycles to meet load.                   | All                |
| Occupied Fan Operation                         | Fixed                                                      | Fan runs continuously during occupied hours                                                                                                                                                                                     | 12                                                                                |                    |

# Fan Operation

# Fixed

Fan cycles on to meet setback temperatures

1-11

# Night Cycle

# D Cooling Efficiency

User defined Cooling COP without fan energy calculated in accordance with Section C40 .6.1.10.2

5, 7, 8, 11, 12

# Packaged Equipment

# D Coil Efficiency

User defined Number of Stages

Single Stage or Multistage

3, 4, 10, 11, 12

# Heat Pump Efficiency

User defined Heating COP without fan energy calculated in accordance with Section C40 .6.1.10.2

2, 4, 5, 7, 8, 12

# Furnace Efficiency

User defined Furnace thermal efficiency

3, 11, 12

# Heat Source

User defined Electric resistance or gas furnace

2, 4, 7, 8, 12

# Heat Pump Supplemental Control

Fixed supplemental electric heat locked out above 40 F (4 C) OAT. Runs as needed in conjunction with compressor between 40 F (4 C) and 0 F (-17.8 C). Gas heat operates in place of the heat pump when the heat pump cannot meet load.

2, 4, 7, 8, 12

# Part-load Fan Controls

System Fan - Constant Volume

User defined Static pressure reset included for VAV.

10, 11

# Two Speed or Three Speed - VAV

Input electric power for all fans required to operate at fan system design conditions divided by the supply airflow rate. This is a wire to air value including all drive, motor efficiency and other losses.

# Design Fan Power (W/cfm)

User defined

# Low-speed and Medium Speed Fan Power

User defined Low speed input electric power for all fans required to operate at low-speed conditions divided by the low speed supply airflow rate. This is a wire to air value including all drive, motor efficiency and other losses. Also provide medium speed values for three-speed fans.

1-8
# Supply Air Temperature (SAT) Controls

If not SAT reset then constant at 55 F (12.8 C). Options for reset based on outside air temperature (OAT) or warmest one.

# Minimum Terminal Unit Airflow

Average minimum terminal unit airflow percentage for block weighted by cfm or defined minimum required for outdoor air ventilation, whichever is higher.

# Terminal Unit Heating Source

Electric or hydronic.

# Dual Set Point Minimum VAV Damper Position

Heating maximum airflow fraction.

# Fan Powered Terminal Unit (FPTU) Type

Series or parallel FPTU.

# Parallel FPTU Fan

Fixed sized for 50 peak primary air at 0.35 W/cfm.

# Series FPTU Fan

Fixed sized for 50 peak primary air at 0.35 W/cfm.

# Economizer

Economizer Presence: Yes or No.

# Economizer Control Type

Lockout on Differential dry-bulb temperature (OAT RAT) in 6A, 5A, All C climate ones fixed enthalpy 28 tu/lb (47k/kg) or fixed dry-bulb OAT 75 F (24 C) in 0A to 4A climate ones.

# Energy Recovery

# Sensible Effectiveness

Heat exchanger sensible effectiveness at design heating and cooling conditions.

# Latent Effectiveness

Heat exchanger latent effectiveness at design heating and cooling conditions.

# Economizer Bypass

If ERV is bypassed or wheel rotation is slowed during economizer conditions (Yes/No).

# Economizer Bypass Active

If there is a bypass, it will be active between 45 F (7.2 C) and 75 F (23. C) outside air temperature.
# Bypass SAT

User: If bypass, target supply air temperature defined

Setpoint: 3, 4, 10, 11, 12

# Fan Power Reduction

User: If ERV system include bypass, static pressure defined

Set point and variable speed fan, fan power: 3, 4, 10, 11, 12

Bypass (W/cfm): can be reduced during economizer conditions

# Demand Controlled Ventilation

# Application on/off

User: Percent of block floor area under occupied standby controls, ON/OFF only with occupancy sensor and no variable control

Setpoint: 3, 4, 10, 11, 12

# Application CO2

User: Percentage of block floor area under variable DCV control (CO2) may include both variable and ON/OFF control

Setpoint: 3, 4, 10, 11, 12

# DOAS

# DOAS Fan Power W/cfm

User: Fan electrical input power in W/cfm of supply airflow

Setpoint: 12

# DOAS Supplemental Heating and Cooling

User: Heating source, cooling source, energy recovery and respective efficiencies

Setpoint: 12

# Maximum SAT Set Point (Cooling)

User: SAT set point if DOAS includes supplemental cooling

Setpoint: 12

# Minimum SAT Set Point (Heating)

User: SAT set point if DOAS includes supplemental heating

Setpoint: 12

# Heating Plant Boiler Efficiency

User: Boiler thermal efficiency

Setpoint: 1, 6, 7, 10, 11, 12

# Heating Water Loop Configuration

User: Constant flow primary only, Variable flow primary only, Constant flow primary, variable flow secondary, Variable flow primary and secondary

Setpoint: 1, 6, 7, 10, 11, 12

# Heating Water Primary Pump Power (W/gpm)

User: Heating water primary pump input W/gpm heating water flow

Setpoint: 1, 6, 7, 10, 11, 12

# Heating Water Secondary Pump Power (W/gpm)

User: Heating water secondary pump input W/gpm heating water flow (if primary/secondary)

Setpoint: 1, 6, 7, 10, 11, 12

# Heating Water Loop Temperature

User: Heating water supply and return temperatures, F(°C)

Setpoint: 1, 6, 10, 11
# Heating

| Water Loop Supply Temperature | Reset | Fixed                                                                | temperature set point | between 20 F(-6.7 C) and 50 F(10 C) OAT |
| ----------------------------- | ----- | -------------------------------------------------------------------- | --------------------- | --------------------------------------- |
| oiler type                    | Fixed | Non-condensing boiler where input thermal efficiency is less than 86 | Condensing boiler     |                                         |

# Chilled Water Plant

| Chiller Compressor Type                                | User defined | Screw/Scroll, Centrifugal or Reciprocating                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| ------------------------------------------------------ | ------------ | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Chiller Condenser Type                                 | User defined | Air cooled or water cooled                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Chiller Full Load Efficiency                           | User defined | Chiller COP                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| Chilled Water Loop Configuration                       | User defined | Variable flow primary only, constant flow primary, variable flow secondary, variable flow primary and secondary                                                                                                                     |
| Chilled Water Primary Pump Power (W/gpm)               | User defined | Primary pump input W/gpm chilled water flow                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| Chilled Water Secondary Pump Power (W/gpm)             | User defined | Secondary Pump input W/gpm chilled water flow (if primary/secondary)                                                                                                                                                                |
| Chilled Water Temperature Reset Included               | User defined | Yes/No                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| Chilled Water Temperature Reset Schedule (if included) | Fixed        | Outdoor air reset: CHW supply temperature of 44 F(6.7 C) at 80 F(26.7 C) outdoor air dry bulb and above, CHW supply temperature of 54 F(12.2 C) at 60 F(15.6 C) outdoor air dry bulb temperature and below, ramped linearly between |
| Condenser Water Pump Power (W/gpm)                     | User defined | Pump input W/gpm condenser water flow                                                                                                                                                                                               |
| Condenser Water Pump Control                           | User defined | Constant speed or variable speed                                                                                                                                                                                                    |

# Heat Reflection

# User Equipment Efficiency

gpm/hp tower fan 6, 7, 10, 11, 12

# Heat Reflection

# User Fan Control

Constant or variable speed 6, 7, 10, 11, 12

# Heat Reflection

# User Approach and Range

Design cooling tower approach and range temperature 6, 7, 10, 11, 12

# Loop flow

# Heat Pump and Heat Pump Control

Fixed Two position Valve with VFD on Pump. Loop flow at 3 gpm/ton 7, 8

# Heat Pump Loop

# User minimum and maximum temperature control

User input: restrict to minimum 20 F(11.1 C) and maximum 40 F(22.2 C) temperature difference 7

# ore depth

250 ft(76 m)

# ore length

200 ft/ton (1.5 m/kW) for the greater of cooling or heating load

# GLHP Well Field

# Fixed

ore spacing 15 ft(4.6 m) ore diameter 5 in (127 mm)

” (1 mm) Polyethylene pipe

Ground and grout conductivity 4.8 tu-in/h-ft2- F (0.6 W/(m ))

a. Part load fan power and pump power modified in accordance with Table C40 .6.1.10.2(2)
# Evaluation Term

|    | Fan Power Coefficients | Pump Power Coefficients |                 |     |                |
| -- | ---------------------- | ----------------------- | --------------- | --- | -------------- |
|    | VSD                    | SP reset                | Ride Pump Curve | VSD | DP/valve reset |
| b  | 0.0408                 | 0                       | 0               |     |                |
| x  | 0.088                  | 3.2485                  | 0.0205          |     |                |
| x² | -0.072                 | -4.7443                 | 0.4101          |     |                |
| x³ | 0.437                  | 2.525                   | 0.5753          |     |                |

# Demand Controlled Ventilation (DCV)

DCV shall be modeled using a simplified approach that adjusts the design outdoor supply air flow rate based on the floor area of the building that is covered by DCV. The simplified method shall accommodate both variable DCV and on/off DCV, giving on/off DCV one third the effective floor control area of variable DCV. Outdoor air reduction coefficients shall be as stated in Table C40.6.1.10.3.

On/off DCV shall receive full effective area adjustment for R-1 and R-2 occupancies.
# Evaluation DCV OSA reduction (y) as a function of effective DCV control floor area (x)

|    | Office  | School  | Hotel   | Family | Dormitory |
| -- | ------- | ------- | ------- | ------ | --------- |
| b  | 0       | 0       | 0       | 0      |           |
| x  | 0.4053  | 0.2676  | 0.5882  | 0.4623 |           |
| x² | -0.848  | 0.7753  | -1.0712 | -0.848 |           |
| x³ | 1.002   | -1.5165 | 1.3565  | 1.125  |           |
| x⁴ | -0.4168 | 0.7136  | -0.637  | -0.585 |           |

The standard reference design shall be configured and analyzed as specified in this section.

Same as proposed design.

Same as proposed design.

Same as proposed design.

Same as proposed design.

Same as proposed design.
Same as proposed design.

Not modeled. Same as proposed design.

Not modeled. Same as proposed design.

Not modeled. Same as proposed design.

# The reference building design HVAC equipment consists of separate space conditioning systems as described in Table C40.6.2.11(1) through Table C40.6.2.11(3) for the appropriate building use types. In these tables, Warm refers to climate zones 0 to 2 and 3A and Cold refers to climate zones 3, 3C, and 4 to 8.
| Building Type                             | Large Office                                |                                        | School (warm)                               | School (cold)                          |              |           |                         |
| ----------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------- | ------------ | --------- | ----------------------- |
|                                           |                                             |                                        | (warm)                                      | (cold)                                 | (warm)       | (cold)    |                         |
| Parameter                                 | VAV/ RH                                     | VAV/ RH                                | VAV/ RH                                     | VAV/ RH                                |              |           |                         |
| System Type                               | Water-cooled Chiller/ Electric Reheat (PIU) | Water-cooled Chiller/ Gas Boiler (PIU) | Water-cooled Chiller/ Electric Reheat (PIU) | Water-cooled Chiller/ Gas Boiler (PIU) |              |           |                         |
| Fan control                               | VSD (No SP Reset)                           | VSD (No SP Reset)                      | VSD (No SP Reset)                           | VSD (No SP Reset)                      |              |           |                         |
| Main fan power (W/CF (W s/L))             | 1.165 (2.468)                               | 1.165 (2.468)                          | 1.165 (2.468)                               | 1.165 (2.468)                          |              |           |                         |
| Proposed ERV                              | Main fan power (W/CF (W s/L))               | 1.066 (2.25)                           | 1.066 (2.25)                                | 1.066 (2.25)                           | 1.066 (2.25) |           |                         |
| Onal fan power (W/CF (W s/L))             | 0.35 (0.75)                                 | NA                                     | 0.35 (0.75)                                 | NA                                     |              |           |                         |
| Minimum airflow fraction                  | 1.5 Vo                                      | 1.5 Vo                                 | 1.2 Vo                                      | 1.2 Vo                                 |              |           |                         |
| Heat/cool sizing factor                   | 1.25/1.15                                   | 1.25/1.15                              | 1.25/1.15                                   | 1.25/1.15                              |              |           |                         |
| Outdoor air economizer                    | No                                          | Yes except 4A                          | No                                          | Yes except 4A                          |              |           |                         |
| Occupied OSA (proposed)                   | Sum(Vo)/0.75                                | Sum(Vo)/0.75                           | Sum(Vo)/0.65                                | Sum(Vo)/0.65                           |              |           |                         |
| Energy recovery ventilator efficiency ERR |                                             |                                        | 50                                          | 50                                     | NA           | No bypass | 60 F (15.6 C) except 4A |
| ERV bypass SAT set point                  | DCV                                         | No                                     | No                                          | No                                     | No           |           |                         |
| (2) Cooling Source                        | (2) Water-cooled Centrifugal Chillers       | (2) Water-cooled Centrifugal Chillers  | (2) Water-cooled Screw Chillers             | (2) Water-cooled Screw Chillers        |              |           |                         |
| Cooling COP (net of Path fan)             | Path for profile                            | Path for profile                       | Path for profile                            | Path for profile                       |              |           |                         |
| Heating source (reheat)                   | Electric resistance                         | Gas Boiler                             | Electric resistance                         | Gas Boiler                             |              |           |                         |

# Furnace or boiler

| Efficiency | 1.0 | 75 Et | 1.0 | 80 Et |
| ---------- | --- | ----- | --- | ----- |

# Condenser heat reflection

# Cooling tower efficiency (gpm/fan-hp (L/s fan-kW))

| 38.2 (3.23) | 38.2 (3.23) | 38.2 (3.23) | 38.2 (3.23) |
| ----------- | ----------- | ----------- | ----------- |

# Tower turndown (300 ton (1060 kW))

| 50 | 50 | 50 | 50 |
| -- | -- | -- | -- |

# Pump (constant flow/variable flow)

| Constant Flow      | Constant Flow      | Constant Flow      | Constant Flow      |
| ------------------ | ------------------ | ------------------ | ------------------ |
| 10 F (5.6 C) range | 10 F (5.6 C) range | 10 F (5.6 C) range | 10 F (5.6 C) range |

# Tower approach

25.72 (0.24 x W), where W is the 0.4 evaporation design wet-bulb temperature (F)

# Cooling condenser pump power (W/gpm (W s/L))

| 1 (300) | 1 (300) | 1 (300) | 1 (300) |
| ------- | ------- | ------- | ------- |

# Cooling primary pump power (W/gpm (W s/L))

| (142) | (142) | (142) | (142) |
| ----- | ----- | ----- | ----- |

# Cooling secondary pump power (W/gpm (W s/L))

| 13 (205) | 13 (205) | 13 (205) | 13 (205) |
| -------- | -------- | -------- | -------- |

# Cooling coil chilled water delta-T, F (C)

| 12 (6.7) | 12 (6.7) | 12 (6.7) | 12 (6.7) |
| -------- | -------- | -------- | -------- |

# Design chilled water supply temperature, F (C)

| 44 (6.7) | 44 (6.7) | 44 (6.7) | 44 (6.7) |
| -------- | -------- | -------- | -------- |

# Chilled water supply temperature (CHWST)

| CHWST: 44-54/OAT 80-60 | CHWST: 44-54/OAT 80-60 | CHWST: 44-54/OAT 80-60 | CHWST: 44-54/OAT 80-60 |
| ---------------------- | ---------------------- | ---------------------- | ---------------------- |

# Reset set point vs Outside Air Temperature OAT, F (C)

| (6.7-12.2/26.7-15.6) | (6.7-12.2/26.7-15.6) | (6.7-12.2/26.7-15.6) | (6.7-12.2/26.7-15.6) |
| -------------------- | -------------------- | -------------------- | -------------------- |

# Building Type

| Large Office (warm) | Large Office (cold) | School (warm) | School (cold) |
| ------------------- | ------------------- | ------------- | ------------- |

# Parameter

| CHW cooling loop                   | 2-way Valves | 2-way Valves | 2-way Valves |            |
| ---------------------------------- | ------------ | ------------ | ------------ | ---------- |
| Pumping control                    | pump VSD     | pump VSD     | pump VSD     |            |
| Heating pump power (W/gpm (W s/L)) | 16.1 (254)   | 16.1 (254)   | 16.1 (254)   | 16.1 (254) |
| Heating oil HW dT. F (C)           | 50 (10)      | 50 (10)      | 50 (10)      | 50 (10)    |

# Design Hot Water Supply Temperature

| HWST                               | 180 (82.2)               | 180 (82.2)               | 180 (82.2)               | 180 (82.2)               |
| ---------------------------------- | ------------------------ | ------------------------ | ------------------------ | ------------------------ |
| HWST reset set point vs OAT, F (C) | HWST: 180-150/ OAT 20-50 | HWST: 180-150/ OAT 20-50 | HWST: 180-150/ OAT 20-50 | HWST: 180-150/ OAT 20-50 |
|                                    | (82-65.6/ -6.7-10)       | (82-65.6/ -6.7-10)       | (82-65.6/ -6.7-10)       | (82-65.6/ -6.7-10)       |
| Heat loop pumping control          | 2-way Valves             | 2-way Valves             | 2-way Valves             | 2-way Valves             |
|                                    | pump VSD                 | pump VSD                 | pump VSD                 | pump VSD                 |

| Building Type                     | Small Office                                           |                   | Medium Office               |                             | Retail          |                 |   |   |   |   |
| --------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------ | ----------------- | --------------------------- | --------------------------- | --------------- | --------------- | - | - | - | - |
| Warm                              | Cold                                                   | Warm              | Cold                        | Warm                        | Cold            |                 |   |   |   |   |
| System type                       | VAV - Electric Reheat                                  | - Hydronic Reheat | PS - HP                     | PS - AC                     | PS - HP         | PS - AC         |   |   |   |   |
| Fan Control                       | VSD (No SP Reset)                                      | VSD (No SP Reset) | Constant Volume             | Constant Volume             | Constant Volume | Constant Volume |   |   |   |   |
| Main fan power (W/CF (W s/L))     | 1.285 (2.723)                                          | 1.285 (2.723)     | (1.41)                      | (1.41)                      | (1.05)          | (1.05)          |   |   |   |   |
| Proposed ERV                      | 1.176 (2.42)                                           | 1.176 (2.42)      | (1.808)                     | (1.808)                     | (1.801)         | (1.801)         |   |   |   |   |
| Optional fan power (W/CF (W s/L)) | 0.35 (0.75)                                            | NA                | NA                          | NA                          | NA              | NA              |   |   |   |   |
| Minimum zone airflow fraction     | 30                                                     | 30                | NA                          | NA                          | NA              | NA              |   |   |   |   |
| Heat/cool sizing factor           | 1.25/1.15                                              | 1.25/1.15         | 1.25/1.15                   | 1.25/1.15                   | 1.25/1.15       | 1.25/1.15       |   |   |   |   |
| Supplemental heating availability | NA                                                     | NA                | 40 F (4.4 C)                | NA                          | 40 F (4.4 C)    | NA              |   |   |   |   |
| Outdoor air economizer            | No                                                     | Yes except 4A     | No                          | Yes except 4A               | Yes             | Yes             |   |   |   |   |
| Occupied OSA source               | Packaged unit, occupied damper, all building use types |                   |                             |                             |                 | No              |   |   |   |   |
| Energy recovery ventilator        | No                                                     | No                | No                          | No                          | No              | No              |   |   |   |   |
| DCV                               | No                                                     | No                | No                          | No                          | No              | No              |   |   |   |   |
| Cooling source                    | D, multi-stage                                         | D, multi-stage    | D, single stage (heat pump) | D, single stage (heat pump) | D, single stage | D, single stage |   |   |   |   |
| Cooling COP (net of fan)          | 3.40                                                   | 3.40              | 3.00                        | 3.00                        | 3.40            | 3.50            |   |   |   |   |
| Heating source                    | Electric resistance                                    | Gas boiler        | Heat Pump                   | Furnace                     | Heat Pump       | Furnace         |   |   |   |   |

# Heating COP (net of fan) / furnace or boiler

| 1.0 | 75 | Et | 3.40 | 80 | Et | 3.40 | 80 | Et |
| --- | -- | -- | ---- | -- | -- | ---- | -- | -- |

| Building Type                                           | Hotel (warm)                   | Hotel (cold)                              | Multifamily (warm)             | Multifamily (cold)                        |
| ------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------ | ----------------------------------------- | ------------------------------ | ----------------------------------------- |
|                                                         | PTHP                           | PTAC                                      | PTHP                           | PTAC                                      |
| Fan Control                                             | Constant Volume                | Constant Volume                           | Constant Volume                | Constant Volume                           |
| Main fan power (W/CF (W s/L))                           | 0.300 (0.636)                  | 0.300 (0.636)                             | 0.300 (0.636)                  | 0.300 (0.636)                             |
| Heat/cool sizing factor                                 | 1.25/1.15                      | 1.25/1.15                                 | 1.25/1.15                      | 1.25/1.15                                 |
| Supplemental heating availability                       | 40 F (4.4 C)                   | NA                                        | 40 F (4.4 C)                   | NA                                        |
| Outdoor air economizer                                  | No                             | No                                        | No                             | No                                        |
| Occupied OSA source                                     | Packaged unit, occupied damper | Packaged unit, occupied damper            | Packaged unit, occupied damper | Packaged unit, occupied damper            |
| Energy recovery ventilator                              | No                             | No                                        | No                             | No                                        |
| DCV                                                     | No                             | No                                        | No                             | No                                        |
| Cooling source                                          | D, 1 stage (heat pump)         | D, 1 stage (heat pump)                    | D, 1 stage (heat pump)         | D, 1 stage (heat pump)                    |
| Cooling COP (net of fan)                                | 3.10                           | 3.20                                      | 3.10                           | 3.20                                      |
| Heating source                                          | PTHP (2) Hydronic Boiler       | PTHP (2) Hydronic Boiler                  |                                |                                           |
| Heating COP (net of fan) / furnace or boiler efficiency | 3.10                           | 75 Et                                     | 3.10                           | 75 Et                                     |
| Heating pump power (W/gpm (W s/L))                      | NA                             | 1 (300)                                   | NA                             | 1 (300)                                   |
| Heating coil heating water delta-T, F (C)               | NA                             | 50 (27.8)                                 | NA                             | 50 (27.8)                                 |
| Design HWST, F (C)                                      | NA                             | 180 (82.2)                                | NA                             | 180 (82.2)                                |
| HWST reset set point vs OAT, F (C)                      | NA                             | HWST: 180-150/OAT 20-50 (82-65.6/-6.7-10) | NA                             | HWST: 180-150/OAT 20-50 (82-65.6/-6.7-10) |
| Heat loop pumping control                               | NA                             | 2-way Valves ride pump curve              | NA                             | 2-way Valves ride pump curve              |

Target system descriptions described in Tables C40.7(1) through C40.7(3) are provided as reference for Section C403.1.1 Exception 10. The target systems are used for developing PF values and do not need to be programmed into TSPR software.
| Parameter                               | Building Type                               |                                        |                                             |                                        |   |   |   |
| --------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------- | - | - | - |
| Large office (warm)                     |                                             | Large office (cold)                    | School (warm)                               | School (cold)                          |   |   |   |
| System type                             | Water-cooled chiller/ Electric Reheat (PIU) | Water-cooled chiller/ Gas boiler (PIU) | Water-cooled chiller/ Electric Reheat (PIU) | Water-cooled chiller/ Gas boiler (PIU) |   |   |   |
| Fan Control                             | VSD (No SP Reset)                           |                                        |                                             |                                        |   |   |   |
| Main fan power (W/CF (W s/L))           | 1.127 (2.388)                               | 1.127 (2.388)                          | 1.127 (2.388)                               | 1.127 (2.388)                          |   |   |   |
| Proposed ERV13 fan power (W/CF (W s/L)) | 0.35 (0.75)                                 | NA                                     | 0.35 (0.75)                                 | NA                                     |   |   |   |
| Minimum airflow fraction                | 1.5 Vo                                      | 1.5 Vo                                 | 1.2 Vo                                      | 1.2 Vo                                 |   |   |   |
| Heat/cool sizing factor                 | 1.25/1.15                                   | 1.25/1.15                              | 1.25/1.15                                   | 1.25/1.15                              |   |   |   |
| Outdoor air economizer                  | Yes except 0-1                              | Yes                                    | Yes except 0-1                              | Yes                                    |   |   |   |
| Occupied OSA (proposed)                 | Sum(Vo)/0.75                                | Sum(Vo)/0.75                           | Sum(Vo)/0.65                                | Sum(Vo)/0.65                           |   |   |   |
| Energy recovery ventilator efficiency   | 50                                          |                                        |                                             |                                        |   |   |   |
| ERR (Enthalpy Recovery Ratio)           | NA                                          | NA                                     | 60 F(15.6 C) except 4A                      | No bypass                              |   |   |   |
| ERV bypass                              | -                                           | -                                      | -                                           | -                                      |   |   |   |
| SAT set point DCV                       | Yes                                         | Yes                                    | Yes                                         | Yes                                    |   |   |   |
| Area Variable Control                   | 15                                          | 15                                     | 70                                          | 70                                     |   |   |   |
| Area On/Off Control                     | 65                                          | 65                                     | 20                                          | 20                                     |   |   |   |
| Cooling Source                          | (2) Water-cooled centrif chillers           | (2) Water-cooled centrif chillers      | (2) Water-cooled screw chillers             | (2) Water-cooled screw chillers        |   |   |   |

# Cooling COP

| Heating source           | ASHRAE 0.1               |                          |                          |      |   |   |   |
| ------------------------ | ------------------------ | ------------------------ | ------------------------ | ---- | - | - | - |
| Appendix G, Table G3.5.3 | Appendix G, Table G3.5.3 | Appendix G, Table G3.5.3 | Appendix G, Table G3.5.3 |      |   |   |   |
| Electric resistance      | 1.0                      | 0 Et                     | 1.0                      | 0 Et |   |   |   |
| Gas boiler               |                          |                          |                          |      |   |   |   |

# Furnace or boiler efficiency

| Condenser heat rejection                                 | Cooling Tower               |                             |                             |                             |
| -------------------------------------------------------- | --------------------------- | --------------------------- | --------------------------- | --------------------------- |
| Cooling tower efficiency (gpm/hp (L/s kW)) See G3.1.3.11 | 40.2 (3.40)                 | 40.2 (3.40)                 | 40.2 (3.40)                 | 40.2 (3.40)                 |
| Tower turndown (300 ton (1060 kW))                       | 50                          | 50                          | 50                          | 50                          |
| Pump (constant flow/variable flow)                       | Constant Flow (5.6 C) range | Constant Flow (5.6 C) range | Constant Flow (5.6 C) range | Constant Flow (5.6 C) range |

# Tower approach

| ASHRAE 0.1                                     |                             |                             |                             |           |   |   |   |
| ---------------------------------------------- | --------------------------- | --------------------------- | --------------------------- | --------- | - | - | - |
| Appendix G, Table G3.1.3.11                    | Appendix G, Table G3.1.3.11 | Appendix G, Table G3.1.3.11 | Appendix G, Table G3.1.3.11 |           |   |   |   |
| Cooling condenser pump power (W/gpm (W s/L))   | 1 (300)                     | 1 (300)                     | 1 (300)                     | 1 (300)   |   |   |   |
| Cooling primary pump power (W/gpm (W s/L))     | (142)                       | (142)                       | (142)                       | (142)     |   |   |   |
| Cooling secondary pump power (W/gpm (W s/L))   | 13 (205)                    | 13 (205)                    | 13 (205)                    | 13 (205)  |   |   |   |
| Cooling coil chilled water delta-T, F (C)      | 18 (10)                     | 18 (10)                     | 18 (10)                     | 18 (10)   |   |   |   |
| Design chilled water supply temperature, F (C) | 42 (5.56)                   | 42 (5.56)                   | 42 (5.56)                   | 42 (5.56) |   |   |   |

# Chilled Water Supply

|                                           | CHWS 44-54/OAT                     | CHWS 44-54/OAT                     | CHWS 44-54/OAT                     | CHWS 44-54/OAT                     |   |   |   |
| ----------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------- | ---------------------------------- | ---------------------------------- | ---------------------------------- | - | - | - |
| Temperature (CHWST)                       | 80-60                              | 80-60                              | 80-60                              | 80-60                              |   |   |   |
| Reset (6.7-12.2)/26.7-15.6                | (6.7-12.2)/26.7-15.6               | (6.7-12.2)/26.7-15.6               | (6.7-12.2)/26.7-15.6               |                                    |   |   |   |
| Set Point vs OAT, °F (°C)                 |                                    |                                    |                                    |                                    |   |   |   |
| CHW Cooling 2-way Valves                  | 2-way Valves                       | 2-way Valves                       | 2-way Valves                       |                                    |   |   |   |
| Loop Pumping Control                      | Pump VSD                           | Pump VSD                           | Pump VSD                           | Pump VSD                           |   |   |   |
| Heating Pump Power (W/gpm)                | 16.1 (254)                         | 16.1 (254)                         | 1 (254)                            | 1 (254)                            |   |   |   |
| (W s/L)                                   |                                    |                                    |                                    |                                    |   |   |   |
| Heating HW dT, °F (°C)                    | 50 (27.78)                         | 20 (11.11)                         | 50 (27.78)                         | 20 (11.11)                         |   |   |   |
| Design HWST, °F (°C)                      | 180 (82)                           | 140 (60)                           | 180 (82)                           | 140 (60)                           |   |   |   |
| Hot Water Supply Temperature (HWST) Range | HWST: 180-150/ OAT 20-50 (82-65.6/ | HWST: 180-150/ OAT 20-50 (82-65.6/ | HWST: 180-150/ OAT 20-50 (82-65.6/ | HWST: 180-150/ OAT 20-50 (82-65.6/ |   |   |   |
| vs Outside Air Temperature (OAT) Range    | -6.7-10                            | -6.7-10                            | -6.7-10                            | -6.7-10                            |   |   |   |
| Heat Loop 2-way Valves                    | 2-way Valves                       | 2-way Valves                       | 2-way Valves                       |                                    |   |   |   |
| Pumping Control                           | Pump VSD                           | Pump VSD                           | Pump VSD                           | Pump VSD                           |   |   |   |

| T C                                    | T RG T I I G IG CRIT RI H C I P Y T |                               |                                                        |                     |                                 |               |               |   |   |   |   |
| -------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------- | ----------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------ | ------------------- | ------------------------------- | ------------- | ------------- | - | - | - | - |
| Building type                          | Parameter                           | Medium office (warm)          | Medium office (cold)                                   | Small office (warm) | Small office (cold)             | Retail (warm) | Retail (cold) |   |   |   |   |
| System type                            | VAV - Electric Reheat               | Package VAV - Hydronic Reheat | PS - HP                                                | PS - AC             | PS - HP                         | PS - AC       |               |   |   |   |   |
| Fan control                            | VSD (with SP Reset)                 | VSD (with SP Reset)           | Constant volume                                        | Constant volume     | 2-speed                         | 2-speed       |               |   |   |   |   |
| Main fan power (W/CF (W s/L)) proposed |                                     | 0.634 (1.343)                 | 0.634 (1.343)                                          | 0.486 (1.03)        | 0.486 (1.03)                    | 0.585 (1.245) | 0.585 (1.245) |   |   |   |   |
| ERV13                                  | 0.35 (5.53)                         | NA                            | NA                                                     | NA                  | NA                              | NA            |               |   |   |   |   |
| Minimum zone airflow fraction          | 1.5 Vo                              | 1.5 Vo                        | NA                                                     | NA                  | NA                              | NA            |               |   |   |   |   |
| Heat/cool sizing factor                | 1.25/1.15                           | 1.25/1.15                     | 1.25/1.15                                              | 1.25/1.15           | 1.25/1.15                       | 1.25/1.15     |               |   |   |   |   |
| Supplemental heating availability      |                                     | NA                            | NA                                                     | 40 F (4.4 C)        | NA                              | 40 F (4.4 C)  | NA            |   |   |   |   |
| Outdoor air economizer                 | Yes except 0-1                      | Yes                           | Yes                                                    | Yes except 0-1      | Yes                             | Yes           |               |   |   |   |   |
| Occupied OSA source                    |                                     |                               | Packaged unit, occupied damper, all building use types |                     |                                 |               |               |   |   |   |   |
| Energy recovery ventilator             | No                                  | No                            | No                                                     | No                  | Yes, in 0A, 1A, 2A, 3A, 6, 7, 8 | Yes           |               |   |   |   |   |
| ERR                                    | 50                                  |                               |                                                        |                     |                                 |               |               |   |   |   |   |
| DCV                                    | Yes                                 | Yes                           |                                                        | Yes                 | Yes                             |               |               |   |   |   |   |
| Area Variable Control                  | 15                                  | 15                            |                                                        | 80                  | 80                              |               |               |   |   |   |   |
| Area On/Off Control                    | 65                                  | 65                            |                                                        | 0                   | 0                               |               |               |   |   |   |   |

| Cooling source                                          |                     | multi-stage                  | single stage | multi-stage | single stage |         |
| ------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------- | ---------------------------- | ------------ | ----------- | ------------ | ------- |
| (heat pump)                                             | (heat pump)         |                              |              |             | D , 2        | D , 2   |
| Cooling COP (net of fan)                                | 3.83                | 3.83                         | 3.82         | 3.8248      | 3.765        | 3.765   |
| Heating source                                          | Electric resistance | Gas boiler                   | Heat pump    | Furnace     | Heat pump    | Furnace |
| Heating COP (net of fan) / furnace or boiler efficiency | 100                 | 81 Eₜ                        | 3.81         | 81 Eₜ       | 3.536        | 81 Eₜ   |
| Heating coil HW dT. F (C)                               | NA                  | 20 (11.11)                   | NA           | NA          | NA           | NA      |
| Design HWST. F (C)                                      | NA                  | 140 (60)                     | NA           | NA          | NA           | NA      |
| HWST reset set point vs OAT, F (C)                      | NA                  | OAT 20-50 (82-65.6/ -6.7-10) | NA           | NA          | NA           | NA      |
| Heat loop pumping control                               | NA                  | 2-way Valves                 | NA           | NA          | NA           | NA      |
| Heating pump power (W/gpm (W s/L))                      | NA                  | 16.1                         | NA           | NA          | NA           | NA      |

| T                                                       | C                        |                    |             |            |   |   |   |
| ------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------ | ------------------ | ----------- | ---------- | - | - | - |
| T RG T I I G IG CRIT RI H C I P Y T                     | uilding Type             |                    |             |            |   |   |   |
| Parameter                                               | Hotel (warm)             | Hotel (cold)       | ultifamily  | ultifamily |   |   |   |
|                                                         |                          |                    | (warm)      | (cold)     |   |   |   |
| System type                                             | PTHP                     | PTAC with Hydronic | Split HP    | Split AC   |   |   |   |
|                                                         |                          | oiler              |             |            |   |   |   |
| Fan control                                             | Cycling                  | Cycling            | Cycling     | Cycling    |   |   |   |
| Main fan power (W/CF)                                   | 0.300                    | 0.300 (0.638)      | 0.246       | 0.271      |   |   |   |
| (W s/L)                                                 | (0.638)                  |                    | (0.523)     | (0.576)    |   |   |   |
| Heat/cool sizing factor                                 | 1.25/1.15                | 1.25/1.15          | 1.25/1.15   | 1.25/1.15  |   |   |   |
| Supplemental heating availability                       | 40 F                     | NA                 | 40 F        | NA         |   |   |   |
|                                                         | (4.4 C)                  |                    | (4.4 C)     |            |   |   |   |
| Outdoor air economizer                                  | Only C 2, 3              | No                 | No          | No         |   |   |   |
| Occupied OSA source                                     | DOAS                     | DOAS               | DOAS        | DOAS       |   |   |   |
|                                                         |                          |                    | except 3C   |            |   |   |   |
| Energy recovery ventilator                              | NA                       | NA                 | Yes         | Yes        |   |   |   |
|                                                         |                          |                    | except 3C   |            |   |   |   |
| ERR                                                     | NA                       | NA                 | 60          | 60         |   |   |   |
| DCV                                                     | Yes                      | Yes                |             |            |   |   |   |
| Area Variable Control                                   | 70                       | 70                 | No          | No         |   |   |   |
| Area Variable Control                                   | 0                        | 0                  |             |            |   |   |   |
| Cooling source                                          | D , 1stage               | D , 1 stage        | D , 1stage  | D , 1      |   |   |   |
|                                                         | (heat pump)              |                    | (heat pump) |            |   |   |   |
| Cooling COP (net of fan)                                | 3.83                     | 3.83               | 3.823       | 3.6504     |   |   |   |
| Heating source                                          | Heat pump (2)            | Hydronic boiler    | Heat pump   | Furnace    |   |   |   |
| Heating COP (net of fan) / furnace or boiler efficiency | 3.44                     | 81 Eₜ              | 3.86        | 80         |   |   |   |
|                                                         |                          |                    | AFUE        |            |   |   |   |
| Heating pump power (W/gpm                               | NA                       | 16.1               | NA          | NA         |   |   |   |
| (W s/L)                                                 |                          |                    |             |            |   |   |   |
| Heating coil heating water delta-T, F (C)               | NA                       | 20 (11.11)         | NA          | NA         |   |   |   |
| Design HWST, F (C)                                      | NA                       | 140 (60)           | NA          | NA         |   |   |   |
| HWST reset set point vs OAT, F (C)                      | NA                       | HWST: 180-150/OAT  | NA          | NA         |   |   |   |
|                                                         | 20-50 (82-65.6/ -6.7-10) |                    |             |            |   |   |   |
| Heat loop pumping control                               | NA                       | 2-way Valves       | ride        | NA         |   |   |   |
|                                                         | pump curve               |                    |             |            |   |   |   |

# CHAPTER R

# Section C

Any buildings are renovated or altered in ways that could affect the energy use of the building as a whole. Chapter requires the application of certain parts of C in order to maintain or improve the conservation of energy by the renovated or altered building.

# Section C

The provisions of this chapter shall control the alteration, repair, addition, and change of occupancy of any existing buildings and structures.

Except as specified in this chapter, this code shall not be used to require the removal, alteration or abandonment of, nor prevent the continued use and maintenance of, an existing building or building system lawfully in existence at the time of adoption of this code.

Additions, alterations, repairs, and changes of occupancy to, or relocation of, existing buildings and structures shall comply with C, C, C, and C of this code, as applicable, and with the provisions for alterations, repairs, additions and changes of occupancy or relocation, respectively, in the International Building Code, International Existing Building Code, International Fire Code, International Mechanical Code, International Plumbing Code, International Property Maintenance Code, International Private Sewage Disposal Code and P. Changes where unconditioned space is changed to conditioned space shall comply with C.

Additions, alterations, repairs or changes of occupancy complying with IHR.

Buildings and structures, and parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. Devices and systems required by this code shall be maintained in conformance to the code edition under which they were installed. The owner or the owner's authorized agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings and structures. The requirements of this chapter shall not provide the basis for removal or abrogation of energy conservation, fire protection and safety systems and devices in existing structures.
Except as otherwise required or permitted by this code, materials permitted by the applicable code for new construction shall be used. Like materials shall be permitted for repairs, provided that hazards to life, health or property are not created. Hazardous materials shall not be used where the code for new construction would not allow use of these materials in buildings of similar occupancy, purpose and location.

# Provisions of this code relating to the construction, repair, alteration, restoration and movement of structures

and change of occupancy shall not be mandatory for historic buildings provided that a report has been submitted to the code official and signed by a registered design professional, or a representative of the State Historic Preservation Office or the historic preservation authority having jurisdiction, demonstrating that compliance with that provision would threaten, degrade or destroy the historic form, fabric or function of the building.

# Section C

# Section C

Additions to an existing building, building system or portion thereof shall conform to the provisions of this code as those provisions relate to new construction without requiring the unaltered portion of the existing building or building system to comply with this code. Additions shall not create an unsafe or hazardous condition or overload existing building systems. An addition shall be deemed to comply with this code if the addition alone complies or if the existing building and addition comply with this code as a single building.

Any nonconditioned or low-energy space that is altered to become conditioned space shall be required to comply with Section C.

1. Where the component performance alternative in Section C is used to comply with this section, the proposed UA shall be not greater than 110 percent of the target UA.
2. Where the simulated building performance option in Section C is used to comply with this section, the annual energy cost of the proposed design shall be not greater than 110 percent of the annual energy cost otherwise permitted by Section C.

Additions shall comply with Section C through C502.3.7.
# Additions shall comply with the following:

1. Where an addition has a new vertical fenestration area that results in a total building fenestration area less than or equal to that permitted by C, the addition shall comply with C, C, or C.
2. Where an addition with vertical fenestration that results in a total building fenestration area greater than C or an addition that exceeds the fenestration area greater than that permitted by C, the fenestration shall comply with C for the addition only.
3. Where an addition has vertical fenestration that results in a total building vertical fenestration area exceeding that permitted by C, the addition shall comply with C or C.

# Skylights shall comply with the following:

1. Where an addition has new skylight area that results in a total building fenestration area less than or equal to that permitted by C, the addition shall comply with C or C.
2. Where an addition has new skylight area that results in a total building skylight area greater than permitted by C or where additions have skylight area greater than that permitted by C, the skylight area shall comply with C for the addition only.
3. Where an addition has skylight area that results in a total building skylight area exceeding that permitted by C, the addition shall comply with C or C.

# New mechanical systems and equipment

New mechanical systems and equipment that are part of the addition and serve the building heating, cooling and ventilation needs shall comply with C and C.

# New service water-heating equipment

New service water-heating equipment, controls and service water-heating piping shall comply with C.

# New pools and spas

New pools and inground permanently installed spas shall comply with Section C404.8.

# New lighting systems

New lighting systems that are installed as part of the addition shall comply with C and C.
The total interior lighting power for the addition shall comply with C for the addition alone, or the existing building and the addition shall comply as a single building.

The total exterior lighting power for the addition shall comply with C for the addition alone, or the existing building and the addition shall comply as a single building.

Additions shall comply with measures from Sections C406.2 and C406.3 to achieve not less than 50 percent the number of required efficiency credits from Table C406.1.1 based on building occupancy group and climate zone. Where a project contains multiple occupancies, credits in Table C406.1.1 from each building occupancy shall be weighted by the gross floor area to determine the weighted average project energy credits required. Accessory occupancies shall be included with the primary occupancy group for purposes of this section. Alterations to the existing building that are not part of an addition, but permitted with an addition, may be used to achieve the required credits.

1. Buildings in Utility and Miscellaneous Group U, Storage Group S, Factory Group F, High-Hazard Group H.
2. Additions less than 1,000 ft² (2 m²) and less than 50 percent of existing floor area.
3. Additions that do not include the addition or replacement of equipment covered by Tables C403.3.2(1) through C403.3.2(16) or Section C404.2.
4. Additions that do not contain conditioned space.
5. Where the addition alone or the existing building and addition together comply with Section C407.

Additions shall comply with Section C405.13 for the addition alone.

Alterations to any building or structure shall comply with the requirements of C. Alterations shall be such that the existing building or structure is not less
conforming to the provisions of this code than the existing building or structure was prior to the alteration. Alterations to an existing building, building system or portion thereof shall conform to the provisions of this code as those provisions relate to new construction without requiring the unaltered portions of the existing building or building system to comply with this code. Alterations shall not create an unsafe or hazardous condition or overload existing building systems.

The following alterations need not comply with the requirements for new construction, provided that the energy use of the building is not increased:

1. Storm windows installed over existing fenestration.
2. Surface-applied window film installed on existing single-pane fenestration assemblies reducing solar heat gain, provided that the code does not require the glazing or fenestration to be replaced.
3. Roof recover.
4. Roof replacement where roof assembly insulation is integral to or located below the structural roof deck.
5. Air barriers shall not be required for roof recover and roof replacement where the alterations or renovations to the building do not include alterations, renovations or repairs to the remainder of the building envelope.
6. An existing building undergoing alterations that complies with Section C407.

# Alterations of existing building thermal envelope assemblies

Alterations of existing building thermal envelope assemblies shall comply with this section. New building envelope assemblies that are part of the alteration shall comply with Section C402. An area-weighted average U-factor for new and altered portions of the building thermal envelope shall be permitted to satisfy the U-factor requirements in Table C402.1.4. The existing U-value of insulation shall not be reduced or the U-factor of a building thermal envelope assembly be increased as part of a building thermal envelope alteration except where complying with Section C407.

Where the existing building exceeds the fenestration area limitations of C402 prior to alteration, the building is exempt from C402 provided that there is no increase in fenestration area.

# Insulation requirements

Insulation complying with Section C402.1 and Section C402.2.1, or an approved design that minimizes deviation from the insulation requirements, shall be provided for the following roof alterations:

1. An alteration of roof-ceiling construction where there is no insulation above conditioned space.
2. Roof replacement for roofs with insulation entirely above deck.

Where compliance with Section C402.1 cannot be met due to limiting conditions on an existing roof, an approved design shall be submitted with the following:

1. Construction documents that include a report by a registered design professional or other approved source documenting details of the limiting conditions affecting compliance with the insulation requirements.
2. Construction documents that include a roof design by a registered design professional or other approved source that minimizes deviation from the insulation requirements.
# 3. Conversion of unconditioned attic space into conditioned space.

# 4. Replacement of ceiling finishes exposing cavities or surfaces of the roof-ceiling construction.

Insulation shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of Sections C402.2.1.2 through C402.2.1.5.

The addition of vertical fenestration that results in a total building fenestration area less than or equal to that specified in C shall comply with C, C or C. The addition of vertical fenestration that results in a total building fenestration area greater than C shall comply with C for the space adjacent to the new fenestration only. Alterations that result in a total building vertical fenestration area exceeding that specified in C shall comply with C or C. Provided that the vertical fenestration area is not changed, using the same vertical fenestration area in the standard reference design as the building prior to alteration shall be an alternative to using the vertical fenestration area specified in T C.

Where some or all of an existing fenestration unit is replaced with a new fenestration product, including sash and glazing, the replacement fenestration unit shall meet the applicable requirements for factor and C in T C.

An area-weighted average of the factor of replacement fenestration products being installed in the building for each fenestration product category listed in T C shall be permitted to satisfy the factor requirements for each fenestration product category listed in T C. Individual fenestration products from different product categories listed in T C shall not be combined in calculating the area-weighted average factor.

New skylight area that results in a total building skylight area less than or equal to that specified in C shall comply with C, C or C. The addition of skylight area that results in a total building skylight area greater than C shall comply with C for the space adjacent to the new skylights. Alterations that result in a total building skylight area exceeding that specified in C shall comply with C or C. Provided that the skylight area is not changed, using the same skylight area in the standard reference design as the building prior to alteration shall be an alternative to using the skylight area specified in T C.

Above-grade wall alterations shall comply with the following:
1. Where wall cavities are exposed, the cavity shall be filled with cavity insulation complying with Section C303.1.4. New cavities created shall be insulated in accordance with Section C402.1 or an approved design that minimizes deviation from the insulation requirements.
2. Where exterior wall coverings and fenestration are added or replaced for the full extent of any exterior wall assembly on one or more elevations of the building, insulation shall be provided where required in accordance with one of the following:
1. An R-value of continuous insulation not less than that designated in Table C402.1.3 for the applicable above-grade wall type and existing cavity insulation R-value, if any.
2. An R-value of not less than that required to bring the above-grade wall into compliance with Table C402.1.4 or,
3. An approved design that minimizes deviation from the insulation requirements of Section C402.1.
3. Where Items 1 and 2 apply, the insulation shall be provided in accordance with Section C402.1.

Where any of the above requirements are applicable, the above-grade wall alteration shall comply with Sections 1402.2 and 1404.3 of the International Building Code.

Where an alteration to a floor or floor overhang exposes cavities or surfaces to which insulation can be applied, and the floor or floor overhang is part of the building thermal envelope, the floor or floor overhang shall be brought into compliance with Section C402.1 or an approved design that minimizes deviation from the insulation requirements. This requirement applies to floor alterations where the floor cavities or surfaces are exposed and accessible (stated note find alternate term or accessible) prior to construction.

Where unconditioned below-grade space is changed to conditioned space, walls enclosing such conditioned space shall be insulated where required in accordance with Section C402.1. Where the below-grade space is conditioned space and where walls enclosing such space are altered, they shall be insulated where required in accordance with Section C402.1.

Altered building thermal envelope assemblies shall be provided with an air barrier in accordance with Section C402.5.1. Such air barrier need not be continuous with unaltered portions of the building thermal envelope. Testing requirements of Section C402.5.1.2 shall not be required.

New heating, cooling and duct systems that are part of the alteration shall comply with Section C402.
| System Airflowa (cfm)  | ulti- one VAV Fan                            | All Other Fan Systems Airflow |        |       |                                              |        |       |       |
| ---------------------- | -------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------- | ------ | ----- | -------------------------------------------- | ------ | ----- | ----- |
|                        | 5,000                                        | 5,000 to 10,000               | 10,000 | 5,000 | 5,000 to 10,000                              | 10,000 |       |       |
| W/cfm                  | Supply fan system                            | 0.358                         | 0.386  | 0.372 | Exhaust, return, relief, transfer fan system | 0.253  | 0.256 | 0.232 |
| Unit with adapter curb | Exhaust, return, relief, transfer fan system | 0.070                         | 0.061  | 0.054 | 0.070                                        | 0.062  | 0.055 |       |
| Additional allowance   | Exhaust, return, relief, transfer fan system | 0.016                         | 0.017  | 0.220 | 0.000                                        | 0.000  | 0.000 |       |

a. See definition of fan system, multi- one variable air volume (VAV).

New cooling systems that are part of alteration shall comply with.

Additional fan power allowances are available when determining the fan power budget (Fan kWbudget) as specified in Table C503.4. These values can be added to the fan power allowance values in Table C403.8.1(1) and Table C403.8.1(2) when calculating a new fan kWbudget for the fan system being altered.

If a new fan system is installed and the existing duct system is not replaced, a fan power allowance as shown in Table C503.3 shall be added to that allowed in Section C403.8.

Where an alteration requires compliance with Section C403 or any of its subsections, mechanical systems that serve the alteration shall comply with Sections C408.2.2, C408.2.3 and C408.2.5.
# 1. Buildings with less than 10,000 square feet (929 m²) and a combined heating, cooling, and service water-heating capacity of less than 60,000 tu/h (280 kW).

# 2. Systems included in Section C403.5 that serve individual dwelling units and sleeping units

# C

Ducts and plenums designed to operate at static pressures not less than 3 inches water gauge (747 Pa) that serve an alteration shall be tested in accordance with this section where the alteration includes any of the following:

1. Where 25 percent or more of the total length of the ducts in the system are relocated.
2. Where the total length of all ducts in the system is increased by 25 percent or more.

Ducts and plenums shall be leak tested in accordance with the SMACNA HVAC Air Duct Leakage Test Manual and shown to have a rate of air leakage (CL) less than or equal to 12.0 as determined in accordance with Evaluation 4-8 of Section C403.12.2.3. Documentation shall be available demonstrating that representative sections totaling not less than 25 percent of the duct area have been tested and that all tested sections comply with the requirements of this section.

# C

New heating and cooling equipment that are part of the alteration shall be provided with controls that comply with the control requirements in Section C403.4 and Section C403.5 other than the requirements of Section C403.4.3.3 and Section 403.4.4.

1. Systems with direct digital control of individual zones reporting to a central control panel.
2. The replacement of individual components of multiple-zone VAV systems.

# C

New heating and cooling equipment that is part of an alteration shall be sized in accordance with Section C403.3.1 based on the existing building features as modified by the alteration.

1. Where it has been demonstrated to the code official that compliance with this section would result in heating or cooling equipment that is incompatible with the rest of the heating or cooling system.
2. Where it has been demonstrated to the code official that the additional capacity will be needed in the future.

# C

New service hot water systems that are part of the alteration shall comply with Section C.
# Where an alteration requires compliance with Section C404 or any of its subsections

Service hot water systems that serve the alteration shall comply with Sections C408.2.3 and C408.2.5.

1. Buildings with less than 10,000 square feet (929 m²) and a combined heating, cooling, and service water-heating capacity of less than 60,000 BTU/h (280 kW).
2. Systems included in Section C403.5 that serve individual dwelling units and sleeping units.

# New lighting systems

New lighting systems that are part of the alteration shall comply with Section C.

Alterations that replace less than 10 percent of the luminaires in a space, provided that such alterations do not increase the installed interior lighting power.

# Where an alteration requires compliance with Section C405

Lighting systems that serve the alteration shall comply with Section C408.3.

# Alterations shall comply with measures from Sections C406.2 and C406.3

To achieve not less than 10 percent of the number of required efficiency credits from Table C406.1.1 based on building occupancy group and climate zone. Where a project contains multiple occupancies, credits in Table C406.1.1 from each building occupancy shall be weighted by the gross floor area to determine the weighted average project energy credits required. Accessory occupancies shall be included with the primary occupancy group for purposes of this section.

1. Alterations that include replacement of no more than one of the following:
2. 1. HVAC unitary systems or HVAC central heating or cooling equipment serving the area of the alteration.
2. Water heating equipment serving the area of the alteration.
3. 50 percent or more of the lighting fixtures in the area of the alteration.
4. 50 percent or more of the area of interior surfaces of the thermal envelope in the area of the alteration.
5. 50 percent or more of the building's exterior wall envelope, including fenestration.

Alterations to buildings in Utility and Miscellaneous Group U, Storage Group S, Factory Group F, High-Hazard Group H.
3. Alterations that do not contain conditioned space.
4. Portions of buildings devoted to manufacturing or industrial use.
5. Buildings in Climate Zone 0A.
# 6. Alterations that are permitted with an addition complying with Section C502.3.7.

# 7. Alterations that comply with Section C407.

Buildings and structures, and parts thereof, shall be repaired in compliance with this section. Work on nondamaged components that is necessary for the required repair of damaged components shall be considered to be part of the repair and shall not be subject to the requirements for alterations in this chapter. Routine maintenance required by code, ordinary repairs exempt from permit and abatement of wear due to normal service conditions shall not be subject to the requirements for repairs in this section.

Where a building was constructed to comply with the International Energy Conservation Code, repairs shall comply with the standard and need not comply with Sections C, C, C, and C.

# For the purposes of this code, the following shall be considered to be repairs:

1. Glass-only replacements in an existing sash and frame.
2. Roof repairs.
3. Air barriers shall not be required for roof repair where the repairs to the building do not include alterations, renovations or repairs to the remainder of the building envelope.
4. Replacement of existing doors that separate conditioned space from the exterior shall not require the installation of a vestibule or revolving door, provided that an existing vestibule that separates a conditioned space from the exterior shall not be removed.
5. Repairs where only the bulb, the ballast or both within the existing luminaires in a space are replaced, provided that the replacement does not increase the installed interior lighting power.

# Change of Occupancy

Spaces undergoing a change in occupancy from F, H, S or U occupancy classification shall comply with Section C503. Buildings or portions of buildings undergoing a change of occupancy without alterations shall comply with Section C502.2.
Alterations made concurrently with any change of occupancy shall be in accordance with Section C503.

Where changes in occupancy and use are made to portions of an existing building, only those portions of the building shall comply with Section C505.2.

Building envelope, space heating, cooling, ventilation, lighting and service water heating shall comply with Sections C505.2.1 through C505.2.4.

1. Where it is demonstrated by analysis approved by the code official that the change will not increase energy use intensity.
2. Where the occupancy or use change is less than 5,000 square feet (464 m²) in area.

Where a change of occupancy or use is made to a whole building that results in fenestration area greater than the maximum fenestration area allowed by Section C402.4.1, the building shall comply with Section C402.1.5, with a proposed UA that shall not be greater than 110 percent of the target UA.

Where the change of occupancy or use is made to a portion of the building, the new occupancy is exempt from Section C402.4.1 provided that there is not an increase in fenestration area.

Where a change of occupancy or use results in the same or increased energy use intensity rank as specified in Table C505.2.2, the systems serving the building or space undergoing the change shall comply with Section C403.
# Energy Use Intensity Rank

|        | T | C                                                         |
| ------ | - | --------------------------------------------------------- |
| High   |   | A-2, -Laboratories, I-2                                   |
| Medium |   | A-1, A-3a, A-4, A-5, b, E, I-1, I-3, I-4, , R-4           |
| Low    |   | A-3 Places of Religious Worship, R-1, R-2, R-3c, S-1, S-2 |

a Excluding places of religious worship.

b Excluding laboratories.

c Buildings three stories or less in height above grade plane shall comply with Section R505.

Where a change of occupancy or use results in the same or increased energy use intensity rank as specified in Table C505.2.3, the service water heating systems serving the building or space undergoing the change shall comply with Section C404.
# Energy Use Intensity Rank

# International Building Code Occupancy Classification and Use

| High | A-2, I-1, I-2, R-1             |
| ---- | ------------------------------ |
| Low  | All other occupancies and uses |

Where a change of occupancy or use results in the same or increased energy use intensity rank as specified in Table C505.2.4, the lighting systems serving the building or space undergoing the change shall comply with Section C405 except for Sections C405.2.6 and C405.4.
# Energy Use Intensity Rank

|        | International Building Code Occupancy Classification and Use       |
| ------ | ------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| High   | -Laboratories, -Outpatient Healthcare, I-2                         |
| Medium | A-2, A-3, Courtrooms, I-1, I-3, I-4, R-1, R-2, R-3b, R-4, S-1, S-2 |
| Low    | A-1, A-3c, A-4, E                                                  |

a. Excluding laboratories and outpatient healthcare.

b. Buildings three stories or less in height above grade plane shall comply with Section R505.

c. Excluding courtrooms.
CH PT R C R R C T R S

A

is a ter lists t e standards t at are re eren ed in vario s se tions o t is do ment e standards are listed  erein y t e ro lgating agen y o t e standard t e standard identi i ation t e e e  e tive date and title  and t e se tion or se tions o t is do ment t at re eren e t e standard e a  li ation o t e re eren ed standards s all  e as s e i ied in S

American Architectural Manufacturers Association

1827 Walden Office Square

Suite 550

Schaumburg, IL 60173-4268

Table C402.5.5

RC Attachments Energy Rating Council

355 Lexington Ave 15th Floor

New York, NY 10017

RC P P P

C

H Association of Home Appliance Manufacturers

1111 1 th Street NW, Suite 402

Washington, DC 20036

I H R C R C

T C

HRI Air-Conditioning, Heating, Refrigeration Institute

2111 Wilson Blvd, Suite 500

Arlington, VA 22201

P R

H P

Table C403.3.2(1), Table C403.3.2(2)
# Table C403.3.2(4)

# Table C403.3.2(1), Table C403.3.2(2)

# Table C403.3.2(1)

# Table C403.3.2(3)

# Table C403.3.2(7)

# Table C403.3.2(3), Table C403.3.2(15)

# Table C403.3.2(3)

# Table C403.3.2(11)

# Table C403.3.2(12), Table C403.3.2(13)

# Table C404.2

# Table C403.12.1

# Table C403.3.2( )

# Table C403.11.2.1(3)

# Table C403.3.2(10), Table C403.3.2(16)

# C403.4.6.1

# HRI
# C403.8.1.2

# HRI

# P R C H

# C403.8.1.2

# I O HRI HR

# H P T

# Table C403.3.2(14)

American Iron and Steel Institute

25 Massachusetts Avenue, NW, Suite 800

Washington, DC 20001

# C402.1.4.2

Air Movement and Control Association International

30 West University Drive

Arlington Heights, IL 60004-1806

# C

# I

# T C P

# R

# C

# T C R

# C

# T R

# C

# I

American National Standards Institute

25 West 43rd Street, 4th Floor

New York, NY 10036

# I C G C

# Table C403.3.2(4)

# I C G H G P H G

# H G

# Table C403.3.2(4)

# I CT C I
# C403.4.6.2

# Table C404.10

# C403.4.6.2

| C | G | H | III | H | I |
| - | - | - | --- | - | - |
| R |   | H | C   | T | I |

# Table C404.2

Pool Hot Tub Alliance (formerly the Association of Pool and Spa Professionals)

2111 Eisenhower Avenue, Suite 580

Alexandria, VA 22314

American Society of Agricultural and Biological Engineers

250 Niles Road

St. Joseph, MI 49085

ASHRAE

180 Technology Parkway NW

Peachtree Corners, GA 30092

# Table C407.4.1(1)

C

R

C, C

C, C

T

C
# Table C404.2

| I | HR | CC | R | P  | C | H |   |   |
| - | -- | -- | - | -- | - | - | - | - |
|   |    |    | C | HR | I | C | O | T |

# Table C403.8.5

| HR | H | C | H   |
| -- | - | - | --- |
| C  | I | O | HRI |

# Table C403.3.2(14)

| I | O | HRI | HR | H | P | T | R | P |
| - | - | --- | -- | - | - | - | - | - |

# Table C403.3.2(14)

American Society of Mechanical Engineers

Two Park Avenue

New York, NY 10016-5800

# Table C402.1.3

| C | C | C | P | C |
| - | - | - | - | - |

# Table C402.1.2, C

| C | T | R | T | P |
| - | - | - | - | - |

# Table C402.3

| C | T | R | T | P | R |
| - | - | - | - | - | - |

# Table C402.3

| T | H | T | T |
| - | - | - | - |

# Table C402.5.4

# Table C402.3

# Table C402.3

# Table C402.3

# Table C402.3

# Table C402.5.2.1.1

# Table C402.5.2.1.2

# Table C404.5.2.1

# Table C406.12(1)
# Table C406.12(2)

# Table C406.12(4)

# Table C406.12(4)

# Table C406.12(3)

# Table C406.12(3)

# Table C406.12(4)

# Table C406.12(1)

# Table C406.12(4)

CRRC

Cool Roof Rating Council

2435 North Lombard Street

Portland, OR 7217

I CRRC T R P

T C , C

CSA Group

8501 East Pleasant Valley Road

Cleveland, OH 44131-5516

# Table C402.5.5

# Table C403.8.5
# Cooling Technology Institute

P. O. Box 681807

Houston, TX 77268

# Door Access Systems Manufacturers Association, International

1300 Sumner Avenue

Cleveland, OH 44115-2851

# U.S. Department of Defense

3010 Defense

Washington, DC 20301

# U.S. Department of Energy

c/o Superintendent of Documents

# Table C402.5.5

C403.15

C403.15

C403.15

C403.15

C403.15
Washington, DC 20585

| C R P | C | P | C | P | T |
| ----- | - | - | - | - | - |
| P     | C | R | P | P |   |
| C     | R | R |   | R |   |

Table C403.3.2(1), Table C403.3.2(2), Table C403.3.2(5), Table C403.3.2(6), Table C403.3.2(14), Table C404.2

| C R P | T | C |
| ----- | - | - |

Table C403.

| C R P | P | C | C |   |
| ----- | - | - | - | - |
| I     | T | P |   | R |

Table C403.3.2(6), Table C403.12.1, Table C405.7, Table C405.8(1), Table C405.8(2), Table C405.8(3), Table C405.8(4),

| C |   | C |   | C |   | C |   | C |
| - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |

Green-e

c/o Center for Resource Solutions

1012 Torney Ave., Second Floor

San Francisco, CA 412 USA

| G | G |   | R |   |
| - | - | - | - | - |
| P | C |   |   |   |

ICC International Code Council, Inc.

500 New Jersey Avenue NW 6th Floor

Washington, DC 20001

| I C | I | C |
| --- | - | - |
| C   |   | C |

| I C | I | C |
| --- | - | - |
| C   |   | C |

| I GC | I | G | C |
| ---- | - | - | - |
| C    |   | C |   |

| I C | I | C |
| --- | - | - |
| C   |   | C |

C

| IPC | I | P | C |
| --- | - | - | - |

# IEC Regional Centre for North America

IEC International Electrotechnical Commission

446 Main Street 16th Floor

Worcester, MA 16808

# Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers

3 Park Avenue, 17th Floor

New York, NY 10016

# Illuminating Engineering Society

120 Wall Street, 17th Floor

New York, NY 10005-4001

# Table C402.1.2, Table C402.1.3

| C | C |
| - | - |
| C | C |
| C | C |
| C | C |
| C | C |

International Organisation for Standardisation

Chemin de Blandonnet 8, CP 401, 1214 Vernier, Geneva, Switzerland

# Table C403.3.2(14)

National Electrical Manufacturers Association

1300 North 17th Street, Suite 900, Rosslyn, VA 22209
National Fire Protection Association

1 Batterymarch Park

Quincy, MA 02169-7471

National Fenestration Rating Council, Inc.

6305 Ivy Lane, Suite 140

Greenbelt, MD 20770

Table C402.5.5

OpenADR Alliance

111 Deerwood Road Suite 200

San Roman, CA 4583

Sheet Metal and Air Conditioning Contractors National Association, Inc.

4021 Lafayette Center Drive

Chantilly, VA 20151-121
# UL LLC

333 Pfingsten Road

Northbrook, IL 60062-20 6

# Table C403.3.2(4), Table C403.3.2(5)

# Table C403.3.2(5)

# United States-Federal Trade Commission

600 Pennsylvania Avenue NW

Washington, DC 20580

# Window and Door Manufacturers Association

2025 Street NW, Suite 800

Washington, DC 20036-330

# Table C402.5.5
# PP I C O R O PP CO RCI

Provisions contained in this amendment are not mandatory unless specifically referenced in the adopting ordinance.

# A

CA provides criteria for board of appeals. Also provided are procedures by the board of appeals to hold its business.

# SECTION C G R

A board of appeals shall be established within the jurisdiction for the purpose of hearing applications for modification of the requirements of this code pursuant to the provisions of C. The board shall be established and operated in accordance with this section, and shall be authorized to hear evidence from appellants and the code official pertaining to the application and intent of this code for the purpose of issuing orders pursuant to these provisions.

Any person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the code official to the board. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the intent of this code or the rules legally adopted hereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply or an equally good or better form of construction is proposed. The application shall be filed on a form obtained from the code official within 20 days after the notice was served.

The board shall not have authority to waive requirements of this code or interpret the administration of this code.

Appeals of notice and orders, other than Imminent Danger notices, shall stay the enforcement of the notice and order until the appeal is heard by the board.

The board shall consist of five voting members appointed by the chief appointing authority of the jurisdiction. Each member shall serve for I RT R O Y R years or until a successor has been appointed. The board member's terms shall be staggered at intervals, so as to provide continuity. The code official shall be an ex officio member.
of said board but shall not vote on any matter before the board.

# 1. Board Composition

The board shall consist of five individuals, who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to building construction and are not employees of the jurisdiction.

# 2. Alternate Members

The chief appointing authority is authorized to appoint two alternate members who shall be called by the board chairperson to hear appeals during the absence or disqualification of a member. Alternate members shall possess the qualifications required for board membership, and shall be appointed for the same term or until a successor has been appointed.

# 3. Filling Vacancies

Vacancies shall be filled for an unexpired term in the same manner in which original appointments are required to be made.

# 4. Chairperson Selection

The board shall annually select one of its members to serve as chairperson.

# 5. Secretary to the Board

The chief appointing authority shall designate a qualified clerk to serve as secretary to the board. The secretary shall file a detailed record of all proceedings which shall set forth the reasons for the board's decision, the vote of each member, the absence of a member and any failure of a member to vote.

# 6. Conflict of Interest

A member with any personal, professional or financial interest in a matter before the board shall declare such interest and refrain from participating in discussions, deliberations and voting on such matters.

# 7. Compensation

Compensation of members shall be determined by law.

# 8. Removal of Members

A member shall be removed from the board prior to the
end of their terms only for cause. Any member with continued absence from regular meeting of the board may be removed at the discretion of the chief appointing authority.

The board shall establish policies and procedures necessary to carry out its duties consistent with the provisions of this code and applicable state law. The procedures shall not require compliance with strict rules of evidence, but shall mandate that only relevant information be presented.

The board shall meet upon notice from the chairperson, within 10 days of the filing of an appeal or at stated periodic intervals.

All hearings before the board shall be open to the public. The appellant, the appellant's representative, the code official and any person whose interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard.

Three members of the board shall constitute a quorum.

When five members are not present to hear an appeal, either the appellant or the appellant's representative shall have the right to request a postponement of the hearing.

The jurisdiction shall furnish legal counsel to the board to provide members with general legal advice concerning matters before them for consideration. Members shall be represented by legal counsel at the jurisdiction's expense in all matters arising from service within the scope of their duties.

The board shall only modify or reverse the decision of the code official by a concurring vote of three or more members.

The decision of the board shall be by resolution. Every decision shall be promptly filed in writing in the office of the code official within three days and shall be open.
to the public for inspection. A certified copy shall be furnished to the appellant or the appellant's representative and to the code official.

The code official shall take immediate action in accordance with the decision of the board.

Any person, whether or not a previous party of the appeal, shall have the right to apply to the appropriate court for a writ of certiorari to correct errors of law. Application for review shall be made in the manner and time required by law following the filing of the decision in the office of the chief administrative officer.
# PP I C O R R Y O CO RCI

Provisions contained in this amendment are not mandatory unless specifically referenced in the adopting ordinance.

# A

This section is intended to encourage the installation of renewable energy systems by preparing buildings for the future installation of solar energy equipment.

# SECTION C COP

# SECTION C

# C G

# C G

These provisions shall be applicable for new construction where solar-ready provisions are required.

# SECTION C G R I ITIO

# SECTION C

# G R I ITIO

A section or sections of the roof or building overhang designated and reserved for the future installation of a solar photovoltaic or solar thermal system.

# SECTION C O R R Y O

# SECTION C

# O R R Y O

# C G

# C G

A solar-ready zone shall be located on the roof of buildings that are five stories or less in height above grade plane, and are oriented between 110 degrees and 270 degrees of true north or have low-slope roofs. Solar-ready zones shall comply with C through C.

1. A building with a permanently installed, on-site renewable energy system.
2. A building with a solar-ready zone that is shaded for more than 70 percent of daylight hours annually.
3. A building where the licensed design professional certifies that the incident solar radiation available to the building is not suitable for a solar-ready zone.
4. A building where the licensed design professional certifies that the solar zone area required by C cannot be met because of extensive rooftop equipment.
# Construction

Documents shall indicate the solar-ready area. The total solar-ready area shall be not less than 40 percent of the roof area calculated as the horizontally projected gross roof area less the area covered by skylights, occupied roof decks, vegetative roof areas and mandatory access or set back areas as required by the International Fire Code. The solar-ready area shall be a single area or smaller, separated sub-areas. Each sub-area shall be not less than 5 feet (1524 mm) in width in the narrowest dimension.

Solar ready areas shall be free from obstructions, including pipes, vents, ducts, HVAC equipment, skylights and roof-mounted equipment.

A collateral dead load of not less than 5 pounds per square foot (5 psf) (24.41 kg/m²) shall be included in the gravity and lateral design calculations for the solar-ready area. The structural design loads for roof dead load and roof live load shall be indicated on the construction documents.

Construction documents shall indicate pathways for routing of conduit or piping from the solar-ready area to the electrical service panel or service hot water system.

The main electrical service panel shall have a reserved space to allow installation of a dual-pole circuit breaker for future solar electric and shall be labeled “For Future Solar Electric.” The reserved spaces shall be positioned at the end of the panel that is opposite from the panel supply conductor connection.

A permanent certificate, indicating the solar-ready area and other requirements of this section, shall be posted near the electrical distribution panel, water heater or other conspicuous location by the builder or registered design professional.
# PP I CC RO RGY CO RCI I I G PRO I IO

e rovisions  ontained in t is a  endi  are not  andatory  nless s e i i ally re eren ed in t e ado ting ordinan e

# A

CC  rovides a  odel  or a  lying ne  rene a ble energy generation   en ne    ildings add ele tri  load to t e grid    is rene a ble energy  ill avoid t e additional e issions t at  o ld ot er ise o   r  ro   onventional  o er generation

# CTIO  CC    G   R

# CTIO  CC

CC      P

CC      P        The purpose of this appendix is to supplement the International Energy Conservation Code and re uire renewable energy systems of ade uate capacity to achieve net ero.

# CC

CC            This appendix applies to new buildings that are addressed by the International Energy Conservation Code.

1. Detached one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses as well as Group R-2 buildings three stories or less in height above grade plane, manufactured homes (mobile dwellings), and manufactured houses (modular dwellings).
2. uildings that use neither electricity nor fossil fuel.

# CTIO  CC       I ITIO

# CTIO  CC

# I ITIO

CC

CC                  The definitions contained in this section supplement or modify the definitions in the International Energy Conservation Code.

T   O    IT  R            RGY The amount of energy production from off-site renewable energy systems that may be used to offset building energy.

I  I G    RGY All energy consumed at the   ilding site    as measured at the site boundary. Contributions from on-site or off-site renewable energy systems shall not be considered when determining the building energy.
# CO

# CITY R

# RGY CI ITY

A facility that produces energy from renewable energy systems and is qualified as a community energy facility under applicable jurisdictional statutes and rules.

# IR CT CC TO HO R T

An agreement by the owner and a renewable energy developer to purchase renewable energy from the wholesale market.

# IR CT O R HIP

An off-site renewable energy system under the ownership or control of the building project owner.

# RGY TI I TIO I T ITY I

CI R RGY PO R P RCH GR T PP A financial arrangement between a renewable electricity generator and a purchaser wherein the purchaser pays or guarantees a price to the generator for the project’s renewable generation. Also known as a financial power purchase agreement and virtual power purchase agreement.

# GR R T I PRICI G

A program by the retail electricity provider to provide 100-percent renewable energy to the building project owner.

# I I R RGY R IR T

The minimum amount of on-site or adjusted off-site renewable energy needed to comply with this appendix.

# O IT R RGY Y T

Renewable energy system which serves the building project and is not an on-site renewable energy system.

# O IT R RGY Y T

Renewable energy systems located on any of the following:

1. The building.
2. The property upon which the building is located.
3. A property that shares a boundary with and is under the same ownership or control as the property on which the building is located, or
4. A property that is under the same ownership or control as the property on which the building is located and is separated only by a public right-of-way on which the building is located.

# PHY IC R RGY PO R P RCH GR T PPP

A contract for the purchase of renewable electricity from a specific renewable electricity generator to a purchaser of renewable electricity.

# R RGY C RTI IC T R C

A market-based instrument that represents and conveys the environmental, social, and other non-power attributes of one megawatt hour of renewable electricity generation and could be sold separately from the underlying physical electricity associated with renewable energy systems also known as an energy attribute and energy attribute certificate (EAC).

# R RGY I T T R I A

A fund established by the local government or other entity to accept payment from building owners to construct or acquire qualifying renewable energy (along with RECs) on their behalf.

# R RGY Y T

Photovoltaic, solar thermal, geothermal energy extracted from hot fluid or steam, wind, or other approved renewable energy production systems used to generate energy.

# IH T P C

An enclosed space within a building that is heated by a heating system whose output capacity is greater than or equal to 3.4 BTU/h ft² of floor area but is not a conditioned space.

# RO RGY P R OR C I PI P
# CTIO CC

# I I R RGY

On-site renewable energy systems shall be installed, or off-site renewable energy shall be procured to offset the building energy as calculated in CC.

where:

| Eonsite | Annual site energy production from on-site renewable energy systems (see CC), including installed on-site renewable energy systems for compliance with C405.13.1 and C406.5.                 |
| ------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Eo site | Adjusted annual energy production from off-site renewable energy systems that may be credited against (see CC), including off-site renewable energy purchased for compliance with C405.13.2. |
| E in    | Minimum renewable energy requirement.                                                                                                                                                        |

When CC is used for compliance with the International Energy Conservation Code, the minimum renewable energy requirement shall be determined by multiplying the gross conditioned floor area plus the gross semiheated floor area of the proposed building by the prescriptive renewable energy requirement from T CC. An area weighted average shall be used for mixed-use buildings.

When CC, Item 2 or CC is used for compliance with the International Energy Conservation Code, the minimum renewable energy requirement shall be equal to the building energy as determined from energy simulations.
# Building Area Type

| Climate | Multifamily | Healthcare/ Hospital | Hotel/ Motel | Office (A-2) | Restaurant (E) | Retail (S) | School ( ) | Warehouse ( ) | Grocery Store (A) | Laboratory ( ) | Assembly ( ) | All |    |
| ------- | ----------- | -------------------- | ------------ | ------------ | -------------- | ---------- | ---------- | ------------- | ----------------- | -------------- | ------------ | --- | -- |
| 0A      | 13          | 35                   | 23           | 10           | 12             | 17         | 16         | 3             | 27                | 41             |              | 5   | 17 |
| 0       | 12          | 34                   | 22           | 10           | 123            | 17         | 15         | 3             | 26                | 40             |              | 5   | 16 |
| 1A      | 11          | 32                   | 20           |              | 113            | 14         | 13         | 3             | 24                | 36             |              | 4   | 15 |
| 1       | 11          | 32                   | 20           |              | 118            | 15         | 14         | 3             | 24                | 37             |              | 5   | 15 |
| 2A      | 11          | 32                   | 20           | 8            | 114            | 13         | 12         | 3             | 22                | 34             |              | 4   | 14 |
| 2       | 11          | 30                   | 18           | 8            | 108            | 12         | 11         | 3             | 22                | 33             |              | 4   | 13 |
| 3A      | 11          | 30                   | 18           | 8            | 117            | 13         | 11         | 3             | 21                | 31             |              | 4   | 13 |
| 3       | 10          | 2                    | 18           | 8            | 110            | 12         | 10         | 3             | 20                | 31             |              | 4   | 13 |
| 3C      |             | 28                   | 18           | 7            | 100            | 10         | 2          | 18            | 27                |                |              | 3   | 12 |
| 4A      | 12          | 31                   | 18           | 8            | 123            | 15         | 11         | 6             | 21                | 32             |              | 4   | 14 |
| 4       | 11          | 2                    | 18           | 7            | 113            | 12         | 10         | 4             | 20                | 30             |              | 4   | 13 |
| 4C      |             | 28                   | 17           | 7            | 111            | 13         | 10         | 4             | 18                | 28             |              | 3   | 13 |
| 5A      | 12          | 31                   | 1            | 8            | 133            | 17         | 11         | 8             | 22                | 34             |              | 4   | 15 |
| 5       | 11          | 2                    | 18           | 8            | 125            | 14         | 11         | 5             | 21                | 31             |              | 4   | 14 |
| 5C      |             | 2                    | 17           | 7            | 116            | 13         | 10         | 4             | 18                | 27             |              | 3   | 13 |
| 6A      | 14          | 33                   | 20           | 10           | 151            | 20         | 13         | 11            | 26                | 3              |              | 5   | 17 |
| 6       | 13          | 33                   | 1            | 8            | 137            | 17         | 11         | 7             | 22                | 34             |              | 4   | 16 |
| 7       | 14          | 37                   | 21           |              | 164            | 20         | 13         | 10            | 25                | 37             |              | 5   | 18 |
| 8       | 15          | 40                   | 22           | 11           | 1              | 0          | 23         | 16            | 10                | 28             | 43           | 5   | 20 |

The annual energy production from on-site renewable energy systems shall be determined using software approved by the code official.

Renewable energy certificates and other environmental attributes associated with the on-site renewable energy system shall be assigned to the initial and subsequent building owner(s) for a period of not less than 15 years. The building owner(s) may transfer renewable energy certificates to building tenants while they are occupying the building.

Off-site energy shall comply with the relevant codes.

The following are considered qualifying off-site renewable energy procurement methods:

1. Community renewable energy capability
2. Renewable energy investment fund
3. Financial renewable energy power purchase agreement
4. Direct ownership
5. Direct access to wholesale market
6. Green retail pricing
7. Unbundled Renewable Energy Certificates (RECs)
# 8. Off-Site Renewable Energy Procurement Agreement

The following requirements shall apply to all off-site renewable energy procurement methods:

1. The building owner shall sign a legally binding contract or other approved agreement to procure qualifying off-site renewable energy.
2. The procurement contract shall have a duration of not less than 15 years and shall be structured to survive a partial or full transfer of ownership of the property.
3. RECs and other environmental attributes associated with the procured off-site renewable energy shall meet all of the following requirements:
1. Are retained or retired by or on behalf of the property owner or tenant for a period of not less than 15 years.
2. Are created within a 12-month period of use of the REC.
3. Are from a generating asset constructed no more than 5 years before the issuance of the certificate of occupancy.
4. The generating source shall be a renewable energy system.
5. The generation source shall be located where the energy can be delivered to the building site by any of the following:
1. By direct connection to the off-site renewable energy facility.
2. By the local utility or distribution entity.
3. By an interconnected electrical network where energy delivery capacity between the generator and the building site is available.
6. Records on power sent to or purchased by the building shall be retained by the building owner and made available for inspection by the code official upon request.

The process for calculating the adjusted off-site renewable energy is shown in CC.

where:

- Eo = site adjusted off-site renewable energy.
- i = Procurement factor for the ith renewable energy procurement method per Section CC103.3.3.1.
- Ei = Annual energy production for the ith renewable energy procurement method.
- n = The number of renewable energy procurement methods considered.

When installed on-site renewable energy capacity is 7.5 W/ft² (80.7 W/m²) of roof area or greater, the procurement factor is 1.00; otherwise, the procurement factor is 0.75, except for unbundled renewable energy certificates which shall have a procurement factor of 0.20. A procurement factor of 1.0 may also be used when the conditions of exceptions 1, 2, or 3 to Section C405.13.1 are satisfied.
Where compliance is demonstrated using the prescriptive compliance option in Section C401.2.1, the number of additional efficiency credits required by Section C406.1 shall be 50 percent higher than that required by Table C406.1.1.

Where compliance is demonstrated using the total building performance option of Section C401.2.1, the percentage of annual energy cost (PAEC), applied to the standard reference design referenced in Equation 4-23, shall be multiplied by 0.8.

In addition to any renewable energy generation equipment provided to comply with Section C406.3, buildings shall install equipment for on-site renewable energy generation with a direct current (DC) nameplate capacity rating of not less than that computed using Equation CD-2.

| AA  | Adjusted area, in ft² (m²)                            |
| --- | ----------------------------------------------------- |
| CA  | Conditioned area, in ft² (m²)                         |
| SNA | Semi-heated and nonconditioned area, in ft² (m²)      |
| RE  | Required on-site capacity, in DC watts                |
| AA  | Adjusted area from Equation CD-1, in ft² (m²)         |
| CF  | Capacity factor from Table CD101.3, in watts/ft² (m²) |

1. Any required renewable energy generation capacity in excess of 10 W/ft² (108 W/m²) of net available roof area is permitted to be provided using an off-site renewable energy system in accordance with Section CD101.4. For the purposes of this section, net available roof area is the gross roof area minus the roof area occupied by any combination of skylights, mechanical equipment, vegetated areas, required access pathways, vehicle.
parking, and occupied roof terrace area.

# 2. The following buildings are permitted to provide off-site renewable energy generation in accordance with Section CD101.4 in lieu of all or part of the on-site renewable energy generation capacity required by Section CD101.3.

# 2.1

Any building where more than 50 percent of roof area would be shaded from direct-beam sunlight by existing natural objects or by structures that are not part of the building for more than 2500 annual hours between 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.

# 2.2

Any building with gross conditioned floor area less than 1,000 square feet (93 m²).

# 2.3

Any building whose primary roof slope is greater than 2 in 12.

# 3.

Alternate forms of renewable energy generation capacity are permitted where the annual energy generation is not less than that produced by the required solar capacity, and where annual energy generation is calculated using an approved methodology.

# 4.

All or part of the required renewable energy generation capacity is permitted to be replaced by other efficiency measures provided such measures will reduce the annual energy consumption of the building by an amount no less than that which would otherwise be produced annually by the required renewable energy capacity, as calculated using the total building performance compliance path in Section C407 and an approved calculation methodology for solar production.
# Electricity

# Climate

| 1A, 2, 3, 3C, 4, and 5       | 2.0 W/ft² (22 W/m²) |
| ---------------------------- | ------------------- |
| 0A, 0, 1, 2A, 3A, and 6      | 2.3 W/ft² (25 W/m²) |
| 4A, 4C, 5A, 5C, 6A, 7, and 8 | 2.6 W/ft² (28 W/m²) |

Buildings that qualify for one or more of the exceptions to Section CD101.3 and that do not have on-site renewable energy systems sufficiently sized to fully comply with Section CD101.3 shall procure off-site renewable energy in accordance with Sections CD101.4.1 through CD101.4.3. Such procured energy shall provide not less than the total annual required off-site renewable energy determined in accordance with Evaluation CD-4 and shall be provided in addition to any renewable energy provided to comply with Section C406.3.

# Definitions

- DEF: Renewable capacity deficit, in DC watts
- RE: Required on-site capacity in DC watts, from Evaluation CD-2
- INSTL: Installed on-site capacity, in DC watts
- OFF: Off-site renewable energy to be procured, in kWh/year

The building owner shall procure and be credited for the total amount of off-site renewable energy required by Evaluation CD-4. Procured off-site renewable energy shall comply with the requirements applicable to not less than one of the following:

1. Community renewable energy facility
2. Financial renewable energy power purchase agreement
3. Physical renewable energy power purchase agreement
4. Direct ownership
5. Renewable Energy Investment Fund

The renewable energy shall be delivered or credited to the building site under an energy contract with a duration of not less than 10 years. The contract shall be structured to survive a partial or full transfer of ownership of the building property.
The total required off-site renewable energy shall be procured in equal installments over the duration of the off-site contract.

The property owner or owner's authorized agent shall demonstrate that where RECs are associated with on-site and off-site renewable energy production required by Sections CD101.3 and CD101.4, the following criteria shall be met:

1. The RECs shall be retained and retired by or on behalf of the property owner or tenant for a period of not less than 10 years or the duration of the contract in Section CD101.4.2, whichever is less.
2. The RECs shall be created within a 12-month period of the use of the REC.
3. The RECs represent a generating asset constructed no more than 5 years before the issuance of the certificate of occupancy.
# PP I C R IR H C T PR

For jurisdictions who wish to adopt a stretch code or HVAC incentive system, make the following changes to Section C403.

# C R

Mechanical systems and equipment serving the building heating, cooling, ventilating, or refrigerating needs shall comply with one of the following:

1. Sections C403.1.1 and C403.2 through C403.14 and also comply with Section C403.1.3
2. Data Centers shall comply with C403.1.1, C403.1.2 and C403.6 through C403.14

# C R

For systems serving buildings or portions of buildings of the following types:

1. Office (including medical office) (occupancy group  )
2. Retail (occupancy group  ), library (occupancy group A-3)
3. Education (occupancy group E)
4. Hotel/motel occupancies (occupancy group R-1)
5. The dwelling units and common areas within occupancy group R-2 multifamily buildings

The HVAC total system performance ratio (HVACTSPR) of the proposed design HVAC systems shall be greater than or equal to the HVAC TSPR of the standard reference design divided by the applicable mechanical performance factor (PF) from Table C40.4. HVAC TSPR shall be calculated in accordance with Section C40, Calculation of HVAC Total System Performance Ratio.

1. Buildings with conditioned floor area less than 5,000 square feet.
2. Alterations to existing buildings that do not substantially replace the entire HVAC system and are not serving initial build-out construction.
3. HVAC systems using district heating water, chilled water or steam.
4. Portions of buildings served by systems using:
# 10CFR part 431

# 4.3

Packaged terminal air conditioners and packaged terminal heat pumps that have cooling capacity greater than 12,000 tu/hr (3500 kW)

# 4.4

A common heating source serving both HVAC and service water heating equipment

# 4.5

HVAC systems not included in Table C40.5.2.10.1

# 4.6

HVAC systems included in table C40.5.2.10.1 with parameters in Table C40.5.2.10.2, not identified as applicable to that HVAC system type.

# 4.7

Underfloor air distribution and displacement ventilation HVAC systems.

# 4.8

Space conditioning systems that do not include mechanical cooling.

# 4.9

HVAC systems that provide recovered heat for service water heating

# 4.10

HVAC systems with chilled water supplied by absorption chillers, heat recovery chillers, water to water heat pumps, air to water heat pumps, or a combination of air and water cooled chillers on the same chilled water loop.

# 4.11

HVAC system served by heating water plants that include air to water or water to water heat pumps.

# 4.12

HVAC systems meeting or exceeding all the requirements of the applicable Target Design HVAC System described in Tables C40.5.4(1) through C40.5.4(3),

# 4.13

HVAC systems serving laundry rooms, elevator rooms, mechanical rooms, electrical rooms, data centers, and computer rooms.

# 4.14

Buildings or areas of medical office buildings that comply fully with ASHRAE Standard 170, including but not limited to surgical centers, or that are required by other applicable codes or standards to provide 24/7 air handling unit operation

# 4.15

HVAC systems serving laboratories with fume hoods

# 4.16

Locker rooms with more than 2 showers

# 4.17

Natatoriums and rooms with saunas

# 4.18

Restaurants and commercial kitchens with total cooking capacity greater than 100,000 tu/h

# 4.19

Cafeterias and dining rooms

# 4.20

Areas of buildings with commercial refrigeration equipment exceeding 100 kW of power input.
# Climate

# Building Occupancy

| Occupancy type                 | Group  | 0A   | 0    | 1A   | 1    | 2A   | 2    | 3A   | 3    | 3C   | 4A   | 4    | 4C   | 5A   | 5    | 5C   | 6A   | 6    | 7    | 8    |
| ------------------------------ | ------ | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- |
| Office (small and medium)      |        | 0.68 | 0.68 | 0.67 | 0.67 | 0.65 | 0.62 | 0.67 | 0.65 | 0.61 | 0.76 | 0.67 | 0.74 | 0.80 | 0.73 | 0.76 | 0.82 | 0.7  | 0.83 | 0.85 |
| Office                         | a      | 0.7  | 0.7  | 0.80 | 0.80 | 0.75 | 0.78 | 0.68 | 0.77 | 0.73 | 0.64 | 0.72 | 0.60 | 0.67 | 0.68 | 0.60 | 0.6  | 0.67 | 0.67 | 0.67 |
| Retail                         |        | 0.57 | 0.54 | 0.48 | 0.52 | 0.44 | 0.44 | 0.41 | 0.48 | 0.38 | 0.43 | 0.54 | 0.65 | 0.44 | 0.65 | 0.64 | 0.48 | 0.43 | 0.42 | 0.36 |
| Hotel/Multifamily/Dormitory    | R-1    | 0.5  | 0.5  | 0.60 | 0.60 | 0.5  | 0.65 | 0.58 | 0.67 | 0.6  | 0.43 | 0.56 | 0.4  | 0.36 | 0.45 | 0.48 | 0.33 | 0.36 | 0.2  | 0.25 |
| School/Education and Libraries | E(A-3) | 0.78 | 0.77 | 0.76 | 0.75 | 0.71 | 0.68 | 0.67 | 0.68 | 0.64 | 0.6  | 0.68 | 0.65 | 0.78 | 0.6  | 0.58 | 0.85 | 0.76 | 0.7  | 0.73 |

a. large office (gross conditioned floor area 150,000 ft² (14,000 m²) or 5 floors) all other offices are small or medium
# Appendix

This purpose of this Appendix is to supplement the International Energy Conservation Code and requires projects to comply with Advanced Energy Credit Package requirements.

This Appendix applies to all buildings, in accordance with Section C406.1, required to comply with, either Section C406.1.1 or Section C406.1.3.

# Requirements

The requirements of this Section supercede the requirements of Section C406.1.1. Projects shall comply with measures from C406.2 to achieve the minimum number of required efficiency credits from Table CD102.1 based on building occupancy group and climate zone. Projects with multiple occupancies, unconditioned parking garages, alterations, and buildings with separate shell-and-core and build-out construction permits shall comply as follows:

1. Where a project contains multiple occupancies, credits in Table CD102.1 from each building occupancy shall be weighted by the gross floor area to determine the weighted average project energy credits required. Accessory occupancies shall be included with the primary occupancy group for purposes of Section C406 and Appendix CD.
2. Unconditioned parking garages that achieve 50 percent of the credits required for use groups S-1 and S-2 in Table CD102.1.
3. Portions of buildings devoted to manufacturing or industrial use.
# Building Climate Zone

| Occupancy Groups  | 0A  | 0   | 1A  | 1   | 2A  | 2   | 3A  | 3   | 3C  | 4A  | 4   | 4C  | 5A  | 5   | 5C  | 6A  | 6   | 7   | 8   |     |
| ----------------- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| R-2, R-4, and I-1 | 17  | 174 | 188 | 1   | 7   | 200 | 200 | 200 | 200 | 200 | 200 | 200 | 1   | 3   | 200 | 200 | 200 | 200 | 200 | 200 |
| I-2               | 78  | 75  | 73  | 71  | 80  | 0   | 100 | 85  | 0   | 7   | 83  | 0   | 0   | 6   | 107 | 106 | 130 | 117 |     |     |
| R-1               | 106 | 100 | 110 | 105 | 10  | 122 | 123 | 125 | 131 | 137 | 12  | 136 | 157 | 13  | 147 | 171 | 158 | 180 | 176 |     |
|                   | 114 | 110 | 112 | 115 | 108 | 107 | 116 | 111 | 114 | 126 | 118 | 123 | 135 | 125 | 125 | 152 | 142 | 153 | 141 |     |
| A-2               | 83  | 81  | 82  | 82  | 86  | 86  | 108 | 1   | 7   | 126 | 111 | 147 | 117 | 113 | 160 | 143 | 163 | 151 |     |     |
|                   | 113 | 113 | 121 | 118 | 123 | 127 | 116 | 116 | 133 | 10  | 100 | 2   | 134 | 125 | 171 | 146 | 150 | 137 |     |     |
| E                 | 1   | 5   | 1   | 100 | 6   | 100 | 105 | 104 | 101 | 113 | 110 | 110 | 120 | 117 | 122 | 131 | 132 | 126 | 131 |     |
| S-1 and S-2       | 108 | 106 | 111 | 10  | 10  | 108 | 8   | 106 | 108 | 134 | 100 | 130 | 200 | 143 | 123 | 200 | 1   | 0   | 18  | 148 |
| All Other         | 54  | 53  | 55  | 56  | 57  | 60  | 61  | 60  | 63  | 68  | 60  | 65  | 73  | 68  | 6   | 84  | 7   | 84  | 78  |     |
